
 

Introduction 
 
 The New Hampshire Division of Public Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control, prepared this manual for childcare providers and parents/guardians of children 
attending childcare.  The disease fact sheets, which comprise most of this document, are 
intended to familiarize people with specific infectious disease problems commonly 
encountered in childcare.  The fact sheets can be easily photocopied for distribution to 
parents and guardians. 
 
 In the event that any of the illnesses mentioned in this manual occur among children 
attending childcare, parents or guardians should be promptly notified by the childcare 
provider and urged to contact their family physician to obtain specific medical care advice. 
 
 Childcare directors should immediately notify the Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control concerning any unusual disease occurrence in their facilities so that appropriate 
disease-control measures may begin promptly.  To contact the Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control call (603) 271- 4496. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



 

 
 
 
 

Acknowledgements: 
 

We extend our appreciation to the many individual and community partners who 
gave generously of their time and effort in the development of the original version of this 
manual, as well as those who participated in this update, including: 

 
o The Berlin Health Department, 
o Cheshire Medical Center, 
o Concord Hospital Child Care Center, 
o East Side Learning Center, 
o Manchester Health Department, 
o Nashua Health Department, and 
o The current and former dedicated staff from the Division of Public Health Services. 

 
Also, special thanks to the many childcare providers who gave us valuable input 

on the content, organization and design of this manual. 
 
 
 

New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services 
Division of Public Health Services 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Department of Health and Human Services’ Mission is to join communities and families in providing 
opportunities for citizens to achieve health and independence. 

 
 
 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



NH Division of Public Health Services 
Immunizations Required for Childcare Attendance 

 
Vaccine Recommended Schedule Comment 
DTaP (Diphtheria, Tetanus, a 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 15-18 Age appropriately required for childcare 
cellular pertussis) months,  4-6 years. attendance per routine childhood vaccination 

schedule. If the child has a contraindication to the 
pertussis vaccine they would receive a vaccine 
called DT which does not contain the pertussis 
antigen.  
 

IPV (Polio)   2 months, 4 months, 6-18 months, 4-6 Age appropriately required for 
years Childcare attendance per routine childhood 

vaccination schedule. 
Hib (Haemophilus 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 12-15 Age appropriately required for childcare 
influenzae Type b) months attendance.  If the child starts the series late or is 
  behind, fewer doses may be required.  If the child 

is unvaccinated, one dose at 15 months or older is 
adequate.  The Hib vaccine is not required after 59 
months of age. 

MMR  12-15 months, second dose 4-6 years Age appropriately required for childcare 
(measles, mumps, rubella) of age.  attendance per routine childhood vaccination 

schedule. 
2nd dose must be at least 1 month after dose one. 

Varicella 12-15 months, second dose 4-6 years Age appropriately required for childcare 
(chickenpox) of age. attendance per routine childhood vaccination 

schedule. 2nd dose must be at least 3 months after 
dose one (for children ages 12 months to 12 years). 
A laboratory test to confirm immunity is 
acceptable.  

Hep B Birth, 1-2 months, 6-18 months. Age appropriately required for childcare 
(hepatitis-B)  attendance. 

 
Immunizations Recommended for Childcare Attendance 

 
Vaccine Recommended Schedule Comment 
Hep A 12 months and at 18 months Age appropriate recommended for childcare 
(Hepatitis A vaccine) attendance per routine childhood vaccination 

schedule. 
Influenza vaccine 6-months and older, one dose annually. Recommended annually. If it’s the first time 

receiving vaccine, two doses are required..  
PCV-13 (pneumococcal) 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 12-15 Age appropriately recommended for childcare 

months. attendance, per routine childhood vaccination 
schedule.  If the child starts the series late or is 
behind, fewer doses may be required.  
Recommended for certain high risk children over 
59 months.  

Rotavirus  Rotarix (RV1) 2 months, 4 months.  Age appropriate recommended for childcare 
 OR attendance per routine childhood vaccination 

 Rotateq (RV5) 2 months, 4 months, 6 schedule.  
months. 

 
 
Recommended Immunization Schedule for children aged 18 years or younger approved by the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practice (ACIP), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and the American Academy of Family Practice 
(AAFP).  
 
If you have any questions about a child’s compliancy, please call the child’s primary care provider or the New Hampshire 
Immunization Program (603-271-4482) 
 

Additional Immunization Resources for Child Care Providers: 
https://www.dhhs.nh.gov/dphs/immunization/ccproviders.htm  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DISEASES THAT ARE PREVENTABLE 
WITH VACCINES 

 
This group of diseases includes measles, mumps,  
rubella, varicella (chickenpox), polio, pertussis, How can the spread of these diseases be 
diphtheria, tetanus, Haemophilus influenza type b, prevented? 
and 7 types of streptococcus pneumoniae, hepatitis 1. All children in daycare must be immunized 
B and hepatitis A.  Prior to immunization appropriately for their age, in accordance 
programs, these diseases were a major cause of with the NH State Law: RSA 141:C-20. 
widespread illness, often with permanent medical Specific information about immunization 
complications and even death.  Most of these schedules can be found on the 
diseases were a problem especially in children, Immunization Requirements Section in this 
although adults were also affected. handbook and on the appropriate fact 
 sheets.  
Who gets these diseases? 2. It is recommended that all adults working 
Some people believe that these diseases are no in a childcare setting, including volunteers, 
longer a problem in the United States or that should have proof of immunization or 
children can’t get them anymore.  This is not immunity to the following vaccine-
true!  These diseases are still circulating.  Cases preventable diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, 
of these diseases do occur, particularly in pertussis, measles, mumps, rubella, 
unimmunized or inadequately immunized children hepatitis B, varicella, and polio.  Although 
and adults.  Measles staged a strong comeback in evidence of such immunization or 
the U.S. in the late eighties and early nineties in immunity is not required for childcare 
unimmunized preschool children and also in high workers, they are strongly recommended. 
school and college age students.  From 1989-1991 3. If a documented case of measles, mumps, 
there were 123 measles associated deaths reported.  rubella, polio, diphtheria, tetanus, varicella 
Forty-nine percent of these deaths were in children or pertussis occurs in your childcare 
less than 5 years of age.  Ninety percent of the facility, you must notify the New 
fatal cases had no history of vaccination.   Hampshire Division of Public Health 
 Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Children in childcare settings and their adult Control..  Their staff will assist you in 
caretakers are especially at risk.  This is because starting any necessary identification and 
the children may be too young to be fully vaccination of susceptible children and 
immunized and because the close contact that adults.  They will also instruct you on 
occurs in childcare facility allows easy spread of procedures for closely watching for any 
many diseases. additional cases and for notifying the 
 parents. 
In this document, each vaccine preventable  
disease is presented briefly.  Although it is Acceptable evidence of immunization or 
unlikely that you will ever see a case of most of immunity in adults can be provided in several 
these diseases, it is very important that you be ways, which vary by the age of the adult and the 
aware of them and of your vital role in preventing specific disease, as listed below: 
their spread.  For further information, please  
contact your healthcare provider. 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DISEASES THAT ARE PREVENTABLE WITH 
VACCINES (cont). 

Adult Vaccination Recommendations Varicella (Chickenpox) 
Tetanus/diphtheria (Td) or tetanus, diphtheria, • Written documentation of age appropriate 
acellular pertussis (Tdap) – All adults need a Td vaccination, 
booster every 10 years following the completion • Anyone born in the United States before 
of the primary 3 dose series.  A one-time dose of 1996, 
Tdap is now the vaccine of choice for any adult • Laboratory evidence of immunity or 
regardless ofage who is due for a Td booster.  laboratory confirmation of disease for 
Anyone who has close contact with infants less anyone born after 1998. 
than 12 months of age should have the Tdap at  
least one month prior to contact.  It is suggested an Hepatitis B 
interval of 2 years or more since the last dose of Documentation of 3 doses of hepatitis B vaccine 
Td, as the minimum interval prior to the given at appropriate intervals (or) laboratory 
administration of Tdap. evidence of immunity is recommended. 
  
Measles Influenza 
Born before 1957 (or) documentation of One dose of influenza vaccine is highly 
vaccination with at least two doses of live measles recommended annually for all childcare workers. 
vaccine, with the first dose given on or after the  
first birthday and the second live dose at least 28  
days from the first (or) laboratory evidence of  
immunity.  
  
Mumps  
Documentation of vaccination with live mumps  
vaccine on or after the first birthday (or)  
laboratory evidence of immunity (or) 
documentation of physician-diagnosed mumps is 
recommended. 
 
Rubella 
Documentation of vaccination with rubella 
vaccine on or after the first birthday (or) 
laboratory evidence of immunity is recommended.  
A history of rubella, without laboratory 
confirmation is NOT acceptable. 
 
For women not immune, vaccination during 
pregnancy is not advised.  Vaccine should be 
administered after delivery. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



WHEN CHILDREN SHOULD BE 
EXCLUDED OR DISMISSED FROM A 

CHILDCARE SETTING 
 

3.6.1 Management of Illness  4. Vomiting illness (two or more episodes of 
A facility shall not deny admission to or send vomiting in the previous 24 hours) until 
home a child because of illness unless one or vomiting resolves or until a healthcare 
more of the following conditions exist.  The provider determines the illness to be non-
parent, legal guardian or other authorized by the communicable, and the child is not in 
parent shall be notified immediately when a child danger of dehydration. 
has a sign or symptom requiring exclusion from 5. Rash with fever or behavior change, until 
the facility, as described below:  a) The illness a healthcare provider determines that these 
prevents a child from participating comfortably in symptoms do not indicate a communicable 
facility activities; b) The illness results in a disease. 
greater care need than the childcare staff can  
provide without compromising the health and Rationale: 
safety of the other children; or c) The child has Exclusion of children with many mild infectious 
any of the following conditions: diseases is likely to have only a minor impact on 

1. Temperature:  Oral temperature 101 F or the incidence of infection among other children in 
greater; rectal temperature 102 F or the group.  Thus, when formulating exclusion 
greater; axillary (i.e., armpit) temperature policies, it is reasonable to focus on the needs and 
100 F or greater, accompanied by behavior behavior of the ill child and ability of staff in the 
changes or other signs or symptoms of out-of-home childcare setting to meet those needs 
illness until medical evaluation indicates without compromising the care of other children 
inclusion in the facility.  Oral temperature in the group. 
shall not be taken on children younger  
than 4 years (or younger than 3 years if a Chicken pox, measles, rubella, mumps and 
digital thermometer is used).  Only pertussis are highly communicable illnesses for 
persons with specific health training shall which routine exclusion of infected children is 
take rectal temperature. warranted.  It is also appropriate to exclude 

2. Symptoms and signs of possible severe children with treatable illnesses until treatment is 
illness (such as unusual lethargy, received and until treatment has reduced the risk 
uncontrolled coughing, irritability, of transmission. 
persistent crying, difficult breathing,  
wheezing, or other unusual signs), until The presence of diarrhea, particularly in diapered 
medical evaluation allows inclusion. children, and the presence of vomiting increase 

3. Uncontrolled diarrhea, that is, increased the likelihood of exposure of other children to the 
number of stools, increased stool water, infectious agents that cause these illnesses.  It 
and/or decreased form that is not may not be reasonable to routinely culture 
contained by the diaper, until diarrhea children who present with fever and sore throat or 
stops. diarrhea.  However, in some outbreak settings, 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



WHEN CHILDREN SHOULD BE EXCLUDED OR 
DISMISSED FROM A CHILDCARE SETTING 

(cont.) 
identifying infected children and excluding or 
treatment of them may be necessary. 
 
Fever is defined as an elevation of body 
temperature above normal.  The presence of fever 
alone has little relevance to the spread of disease 
and may or may not preclude a child’s 
participation in childcare.  The height of the fever 
does not necessarily indicate the severity of the 
child’s illness.  A child’s over-exertion in a hot, 
dry climate may produce a fever.  Life-threatening 
diseases, such as meningitis, cause a small 
proportion of childhood illness with fever. 
Generally, young infants show less fever with 
serious illness than older children.  Infants and 
children older than 4 months should be excluded 
whenever behavior changes and/or signs or 
symptoms of illness accompany fever.  Infants 4 
months old or younger should be excluded when 
rectal temperature is 101 F or above, or axillary 
(i.e., armpit) temperature is 100 F or above, even 
if there has not been a change in their behavior. 
 
It is unreasonable and inappropriate for childcare 
staff to attempt to determine which illnesses with 
fevers may be serious.  The child’s parents or 
legal guardians, with the help of their child’s 
healthcare provider, are responsible for these 
decisions; therefore, parents should be informed 
promptly when their child is found to have a fever 
while attending childcare. 
 
 
 
 
Excerpted from Caring For Our Children, 
National Health and Safety Performance 
Standards:  Guidelines for Out-of-Home Child 
Care Programs, The American Public Health 
Association (Washington DC) and the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (Elks Grove Village, IL), 
2011. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



WHEN STAFF SHOULD BE EXCLUDED OR 
DISMISSED FROM A CHILDCARE SETTING 

(cont.) 
 

WHEN STAFF SHOULD BE EXCLUDED OR 
DISMISSED FROM A CHILDCARE SETTING 

 
A facility should not deny admission to or send  

home a staff member or substitute with illness m) Scabies, until after treatment has been 
unless one or more of the following conditions completed; 
exists.  The staff member should be excluded as n) Purulent conjunctivitis, defined as pink or 
follows: red conjunctiva with white or yellow eye 

a) Chickenpox, as directed by Bureau of discharge, often with matted eyelids after 
Infectious Disease Control; sleep, and including eye pain or redness of 

b) Shingles, only if the lesions cannot be the eyelids or skin surrounding the eye, 
covered by clothing or a dressing until the until examined by a physician and 
lesions have crusted; approved for readmission; 

c) Rash with fever or joint pain, until o) Haemophilus influenza type b (Hib), until 
diagnosed not to be measles or rubella; directed by the Bureau of Infectious 

d) Measles, as directed by the Bureau of Disease Control;  
Infectious Disease Control; p) Meningococcal infection, until directed by 

e) Rubella, as directed by the Bureau of the Bureau of Infectious Disease Control; 
Infectious Disease Control;  q) Respiratory illness, if the illness limits the 

f) Diarrhea illness, nausea and /or vomiting staff member’s ability to provide an 
three or more episodes of diarrhea during acceptable level of childcare and 
the previous 24 hours or blood in stools, compromises the health and safety of the 
until 48 hours after the resolution of children. 
symptoms unless vomiting is identified as r) There may be other communicable 
a non-communicable condition such as diseases that pose a threat to the public’s 
pregnancy or digestive disorder or deemed health that are not specifically listed here 
non-infectious by a healthcare for which it may be appropriate to restrict 
professional; certain activities of cases, suspect cases, 

g) Hepatitis A virus, as directed by the and close contacts until they are no longer 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control; infectious in consultation with the health 

h) Pertussis, as directed by the Bureau of department.   
Infectious Disease Control;  

i) Skin infections (such as impetigo), until Childcare providers who have herpes cold sores 
24 hours after treatment has been initiated; should not be excluded from the childcare facility, 

j) Tuberculosis, as directed by the Bureau of but should: 
Infectious Disease Control and the 1) Cover and not touch their lesions; 
Tuberculosis program; 2) Carefully observe handwashing policies; 

k) Strep throat or other streptococcal 3) Refrain from kissing or nuzzling infants or 
infection, until 24 hours after initial children, especially children with 
antibiotic treatment and end of fever; dermatitis. 

l) Head lice, from the end of the day of  
discovery until the first treatment; Excerpted from Care For Our Children, National Health and 

Safety Performance Standards:  Guidelines for Out-Of-Home 
Childcare Programs, American Public Health Association, 
2011. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



Placeholder for “What Diseases Must Be Reported to Health Officials: 
Should go to: https://www.dhhs.nh.gov/dphs/cdcs/documents/reportablediseases.pdf  



 
 

Child Abuse 
 
 
 

The NH Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF) is dedicated to assisting families in 
the protection, development, permanency and well being of their children and the communities in 
which they live.  Child protection and family support services are provided by Child Protective Service 
Workers (CPSWs) in 12 District Offices throughout New Hampshire.  Under certain circumstances, 
DCYF also provides voluntary services to families that request them.  These are available to families 
that have not had a finding of abuse or neglect.     
 

DCYF strives to protect children from abuse and neglect and to help families nurture their 
children into physically and emotionally healthy adults.  The prevention and identification of child 
abuse and neglect is a community responsibility that depends on the cooperation of all community 
members.  In situations where abuse, neglect or sexual abuse is suspected or if discussion with the 
family does not relieve concerns, then the Division for Children, Youth and Families should be 
contacted at 603-271-6562 or 1-800-894-5533 (In state only) 24 hours per day. 
 

If you suspect that a child is being abused or neglected, NH state law requires that you report 
your concerns to the DCYF Central Intake Unit immediately.  Proof of abuse or neglect is not required 
before reporting.  Early reporting often prevents greater harm to children and other family members.  
The same law that requires reporting (RSA 169-C) also states that any person who makes a report in 
good faith is immune from any civil or criminal liability.  It is better to make your concerns known 
than to remain silent and possibly allow a child to be seriously harmed. 

 
 

 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DIAPERING RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Changing diapers in a sanitary way is essential to Disposable gloves 
prevent infectious organisms present in the stool Although gloves are not necessary for diaper 
from spreading.  If the organisms, which cause changing, they may reduce contamination of the 
infectious diarrhea, hepatitis-A, giardiasis and other caregiver’s hands and reduce the presence of 
illnesses, are accidentally ingested, the disease may infectious disease agents under the fingernails and 
be transmitted.  You can help prevent illness by from the hand surfaces.  Even if gloves are used, 
remembering the following guidelines as you diaper caregivers must wash their hands after each child’s 
children. diaper changing to prevent the spread of disease-
 causing agents.  Caregivers must remove the gloves 
Equipment Concerns For Diapering: using the proper technique otherwise the 
 contaminated gloves will spread infectious disease 
Changing area and surface agents. 
Children should be discouraged from remaining in  
or entering the diaper changing area.  Keep the Potty chairs 
changing surface away from children, preferably at Use of potty chairs should be discouraged.  If potty 
least 36 inches from the floor.  Cover it with a chairs are used, they should be emptied into a toilet, 
smooth, moisture-resistant, easily cleanable cleaned in a utility sink, sanitized after each use, 
material.  For extra protection, use disposable and stored in the bathroom.  After the potty is 
single-service covers for each child.  A changing sanitized, the utility sink should also be sanitized.  
table should be nonporous, kept in good repair, and Potty chairs should not be washed in a sink used for 
cleaned and sanitized after each use to remove washing hands.  If potty chairs are used, they should 
visible soil, followed by wetting with an approved be constructed of plastic or similar nonporous 
sanitizing solution.  Diaper changing should not be synthetic products.  Wooden potty chairs should not 
conducted on surfaces used for other purposes, be used, even if the surface is coated with a finish.  
especially not on any counter that is used during The finished surface of wooden potty chairs is not 
food preparation or mealtimes. durable and, therefore, may become difficult to 
 wash and sanitize effectively. 
Hand washing sink and towels  
The best hand washing sink is one equipped with Diapers 
both hot and cold running water mixed through one Use of disposable diapers is recommended to best 
faucet (with a minimum water temperature at least reduce the risk of infections.  Cloth diapers require 
60-degrees and not greater than 120-degrees).  more handling than disposable diapers (the more 
Ideally, water controls should be foot, knee or wrist handling the greater chance of infection).  When 
operated to avoid contamination of or by hands.  cloth diapers are used, no rising or dumping of 
The sink should be in the same room as the contents of the diaper shall be performed at the 
changing surface.  Keep soap and towels nearby.  childcare facility.  Clean diapers should be stored 
Use single-service towels (e.g., paper towels) away from dirty diapers.  A child’s diaper should be 
instead of cloth towels. checked for wetness and feces as least hourly, and 

whenever the child indicates discomfort or exhibits 
behavior that suggests a soiled or wet diaper.  
Diapers should be changed when they are found to 
be wet or soiled. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DIAPERING RECOMMENDATIONS (cont.) 
  
Diapering Procedures: b) If safety pins are used, close each pin 
The following diaper changing procedure should be immediately once it is removed and keep 
posted in the changing area and should be followed pins out of the child’s reach.  Never hold 
for all diaper changes. pins in your mouth; 
 c) Lift the child’s legs as needed to use 
Step 1:  Get organized.  Before you bring the disposable wipes to clean the skin on the 
child to the diaper changing area, wash your child’s genitalia and buttocks.  Remove the 
hands and bring what you need to the diaper- stool and urine from front to back and use a 
changing table: fresh wipe each time.  Put the soiled wipes 

a) Non-absorbent paper liner large enough to into the soiled diaper or directly into a 
cover the changing surface from the child’s plastic-lined, hands-free covered can. 
shoulders to beyond the child’s feet;  

b) Fresh diaper, clean clothes (if you need Step 4:  Remove the soiled diaper without 
them); contaminating any surface not already in contact 

c) Wipes for cleaning the child’s genitalia and with stool or urine. 
buttocks removed from the container or a) Fold the soiled surface of the diaper inward; 
dispensed so the container will not be b) Put soiled disposable diapers in a covered, 
touched during diaper changing; plastic-lined, hands-free covered can.  If 

d) A plastic bag for any soiled diapers; reusable cloth diapers are used, put the 
e) Disposable gloves, if you plan to use them soiled cloth diaper and its contents (without 

(put gloves on before handling soiled emptying or rinsing) in a plastic bag or into 
clothing or diapers); a plastic-lined, hands-free covered can to 

f) A thick application of any diaper cream give to the parents or laundry service; 
(when appropriate) removed from the c) If gloves are used, remove them using the 
container to a piece of disposable material proper technique and put them into a plastic-
such as facial or toilet tissues. lined, hands-free covered can; 

 d) Whether or not gloves are used, use a 
Step 2:  Carry the child to the changing table, disposable wipe to clean the surface of the 
keeping soiled clothing away from you and any caregiver’s hands and another to clean the 
surface you cannot easily clean and sanitize after child’s hands, and put the wipes into the 
the change. plastic-lined, hands-free covered can; 

a) Always keep a hand on the child; e) Check for spills under the child.  If there are 
b) If the child’s feet cannot be kept out of the any, use the paper that extends under the 

diaper or from contact with soiled skin child’s feet to fold over the disposable paper 
during the changing process, remove the so a fresh, unsoiled paper surface is now 
child’s shoes and socks so the child does not under the child’s buttocks. 
contaminate these surfaces with stool or  
urine during the diaper changing; Step 5:  Put on a clean diaper and dress the 

c) Put soiled clothes in a plastic bag and child. 
securely tie the plastic bag to send the soiled a) Slide a fresh diaper under the child; 
clothes home. b) Use a facial or toilet tissue to apply any 

 necessary diaper creams, discarding the 
Step 3:  Clean the child’s diaper area. tissue in a covered, plastic-lined, hands-free 

a) Place the child on the diaper change surface covered can; 
and unfasten the diaper but leave the soiled c) Note and plan to report any skin problems 
diaper under the child; such as redness, skin cracks, or bleeding; 

 

Division of Public Health Services                                                                                                         REVISED – January 2018 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control 



DIAPERING RECOMMENDATIONS (cont.) 
d) Fasten the diaper.  If pins are used, place  

your hand between the child and diaper SOURCE:  Caring For Our Children, National 
when inserting the pin. Health and Safety Performance Standards:  

 Guidelines for Out-Of-Home Childcare Programs. 
Step 6:  Wash the child’s hands and return the http://cfoc.nrckids.org/  
child to a supervised area. 

a) Use soap and water, no less than 60 degrees 
F and no more than 120 degrees F, at a sink 
to wash the child’s hands, if you can. 

b) If the child is too heavy to hold for hand 
washing or cannot stand at the sink, use 
commercial disposable diaper wipes or 
follow this procedure: 

I. Wipe the child’s hands with a damp 
paper towel moistened with a drop of 
liquid soap; 

II. Wipe the child’s hands with a paper 
towel wet with clear water; 

III. Dry the child’s hands with a paper 
towel. 

 
Step 7:  Clean and sanitize the diaper-changing 
surface. 

a) Dispose of the disposable paper liner used 
on the diaper changing surface in a plastic-
lined, hands-free covered can; 

b) Clean any visible soil from the changing 
surface with detergent and water; rinse 
with water. 

c) Wet the entire changing surface with the 
sanitizing solution (e.g., spray a sanitizing 
bleach solution of ¼ cup of household 
liquid chlorine bleach in one gallon of tap 
water, mixed fresh daily); 

d) Put away the spray bottle of sanitizer.  If the 
recommended bleach dilution is sprayed as 
a sanitizer on the surface, leave it in 
contact with the surface for at least two (2) 
minutes.  The surface can be left to air dry 
or can be wiped dry after two (2) minutes 
of contact with the bleach solution.  

 
Step 8:  Wash your hands using proper 
technique. 

Division of Public Health Services                                                                                                         REVISED – January 2018 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control 



PETS IN CHILDCARE FACILITIES 
 
Infants and children less than 5 years old are more 6. Wash hands with soap and warm water 
likely than most people to get diseases from after contact with animals or their 
animals.  Reptiles (e.g., lizards, snakes, turtles), environment. 
amphibians (e.g., frogs, toads, newts,  
salamanders), and young birds (e.g., baby chicks, Because wild animals can carry diseases that are 
ducklings) should not be permitted in rooms dangerous to people, children should not have 
occupied by children.  Children and infants should direct contact with wildlife.  Teach children never 
not have contact with these animals or items that to handle unfamiliar animals, wild or domestic, 
have been in contact with these animals or their even if the animal appears to be friendly. 
environments.  
 For concerns about pets in a childcare facility 
When bringing appropriate pets into a childcare please contact the Division of Public Health 
facility, the following guidelines should be Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease and 
followed: Control at (603) 271-4496. 

1. Children should always be properly  
supervised when animals are available. For more information please view the Centers for 

2. Areas should be designated for animal Disease Control and Prevention’s website: 
contact.  Such areas should be properly http://www.cdc.gov/healthypets/ 
cleaned regularly and after animal contact.  
Food or drink should not be consumed in 
these areas. 

3. No animals should be allowed to run 
freely. 

4. All animals should be in good physical 
condition and vaccinated against 
transmittable diseases.  Dogs, cats, and 
ferrets require proof of current rabies 
vaccination.  Animals should be kept clean 
and free of intestinal parasites, fleas, ticks, 
mites, and lice.  

5. All fecal material must be cleaned from 
the cage of any mammal or bird on an as 
needed basis, (at a minimum of one time 
per week), and appropriate sanitizer used.  
Reptiles, fish and insects must be cared for 
in a manner to minimize odor and 
maintain health.  Persons cleaning cages 
must wear gloves, masks, and glasses or 
goggles.  Cleaning should be preformed 
by individuals >5 years old, under the 
supervision of an adult.  Ideally, cleaning 
should be performed when other children 
are not in the room. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



FOOD HANDLING FOR CHILDCARE. 

FOOD HANDLING FOR CHILDCARE 
SETTINGS 

 
In order to prevent foodborne illness caused by wise, do not allow children to eat foods that 
bacteria, viruses and parasites, it is very important have been dropped on the floor. 
that food be handled properly.  Persons who have 10. Discard all food left on plates at the end of 
signs or symptoms of illness, including vomiting, mealtime. 
diarrhea or infectious skin lesions which can not be 11. Do not reuse lunch bags or bags from other 
covered, or who are infected with foodborne items because of possible contamination. 
pathogens (e.g., Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli 12. Food should be stored away from areas 
O157:H7) should not handle food.  Whenever where diapering is done.  
possible, staff who diaper children and have  
frequent exposure to feces should not prepare food How to Properly Defrost Foods 
for others.  Careful handwashing needs to be 1. Plan ahead to allow time for defrosting food 
practiced at all times, especially for caregivers who properly. 
prepare food. 2. Defrost food in the refrigerator.  If 
 defrosting outside the refrigerator, place 
Preparing, Eating and Storing Food food in a sealed plastic bag and immerse in 

1. Wash hands well before and after touching cold water, changing the water frequently. 
food. 3. Do not refreeze foods unless the package 

2. Wash utensils, platters, counter tops and label states that it is safe to refreeze. 
cutting boards with hot soapy water before 4. Follow instructions for microwave defrost as 
and after contact with raw meat or poultry given in operating manuals of microwave. 
products.  

3. Staff who diaper children and have frequent What to Do If the Freezer Fails or The 
exposure to feces should not prepare food Power Goes Out 
for others. 1. Keep the refrigerator-freezer door closed. 

4. Canned soup and poultry products should be 2. If your refrigerator-freezer will be shut off 
eaten immediately after opening. for more than two hours, make immediate 

5. Fruits and vegetables should be rinsed well. arrangements for alternate storage of food 
6. Wash meal service area before and after elsewhere.  Transport food in insulated 

serving food with hot soapy water followed coolers or in thick layers of paper. 
with a disinfectant solution.  (Note: You can 3. When the power comes back on, throw away 
make your own disinfectant by mixing one any food with an unusual color or odor.  Do 
tablespoon of bleach with one quart water not taste this food. 
prepared fresh daily.) 4. If refrigerated foods are above 40 F for more 

7. Wash children’s hands before eating. than two hours, most perishable foods will 
8. Use separate utensils for each child.  If be need to be discarded. 

interrupted while feeding an infant, wash 5. Frozen foods can be refrozen if they are at 
hands again before continuing and before or below 40 F or still contain ice crystals. 
feeding another child. 

9. Oversee mealtime and encourage children 
not to share food, plates, or utensils.  Like-

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



FOOD HANDLING FOR CHILDCARE 
SETTINGS (cont.) 

 
  
Infant Formula Freezing Food 
Prepared infant formula or bottled milk should be 1. Wrap meat in freezer paper, plastic wrap or 
refrigerated and clearly labeled with the child’s first foil if not already wrapped properly. 
and last names.  Any formula or bottled breast milk 2. Date packages using the oldest first. 
not consumed by an infant may be used later in the 3. Check the freezer temperature regularly.  It 
day if dated and stored in the refrigerator.  should be at or below 0 F. 
Otherwise, is should be discarded or returned to the  
parent at the end of the day. Leftover Food 
 1. Do not reuse leftovers that have already 
Shopping Guidelines been served. 

1. Allow adequate transport time to and from 2. Refrigerate unused leftovers immediately.  
grocery shopping to prevent spoilage of Store in small shallow covered containers.  
fresh or defrosting of frozen products. Date packages and discard if not used within 

2. Do not buy or use food from containers that 72 hours.  Meat can be refrigerated safely 
are leaking, bulging or severely dented. for two days. 

3. Do not buy jars that are cracked or have 3. Reheat leftovers all the way through.  Bring 
bulging lids or cans that are bulging or gravies to a rolling boil. 
leaking.  

4. Purchase meat and dairy products last.  Proper Hand Washing Technique 
Refrigerate these products as soon as you Children and babies should have their hands 
get to the childcare center. washed: 1) upon arrival to the daycare facility, 2) 

 before eating/preparing food, 3) after 
Refrigerating Food toileting/diapering changes, and 4) after touching 

1. Keep the refrigerator clean and establish a body secretions 5) after playing outside, especially 
regular cleaning schedule. after playing sandboxes. 

2. Defrost the freezer when necessary.  Ice  
buildup prevents refrigerators from cooling Adults (including staff, volunteers, students and 
properly. parent helpers) should wash their hands: 1) when 

3. Avoid overcrowding in the refrigerator.  The they arrive at the daycare facility, before starting 
more crowded it is, the less cooling effect. work, 2) before eating/preparing food, or feeding 

4. Check the gaskets regularly; they should be children, 4) after toileting/diapering a child or using 
flexible to keep the cold air from leaking the bathroom themselves, and 4) after handling 
out. body secretions. 

5. Keep a thermometer and check the  
temperature inside on a regular basis.  The How to Properly Wash Your Hands 
temperature should be at or below 40 F. 1. Use soap, preferably liquid, and warm 

6. Refrigerate perishable bag lunches.  If running water. 
refrigeration is not available, put a container 2. Wash your hands for at least 10 seconds 
filled with frozen water, a plastic bag with while rubbing your hands vigorously as you 
ice cubes or a cold or frozen beverage into wash them. 
the bag for storage. 3. Wash ALL surfaces including: back of 

hands, wrists, between fingers and under 
nails.

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



FOOD HANDLING FOR CHILDCARE 
SETTINGS (cont.) 

 
 

4. Rinse your hands well.  Leave water 
running. 

5. Dry your hands with a single-use towel (e.g., 
a paper towel) 

6. Turn off the water using a PAPER TOWEL 
instead of your bare hands. 

7. Throw the paper towel away. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



RASHES 
 

 
 
 

Rashes may occur for many reasons and it is impossible to cover in this manual all the causes for a 
rash.  In most cases, rashes that last for more than a day that are accompanied by fever and/or other 
symptoms of illness, or rashes that develop all over the body should be referred to a physician for diagnosis 
before a child returns to the childcare facility. 
 

Sensitive rashes that are caused from plant sensitivity such as poison ivy, poison oak and poison 
sumac often have unusually shaped blister-like sores.  The fluid in these blisters is not contagious to others.  
People react to direct contact from the plant or from indirect contact from clothing, or other objects 
contaminated from plant contact.  (A family pet can also indirectly pass this to people when its fur is 
contaminated).  It is best to consult a physician for treatment. 
 

Hives is a rash that may happen when a person is hypersensitive to such things as certain foods, 
drugs, and bee stings.  It may also be due to emotional factors.  The rash is usually itchy, raised, reddish 
welts on the skin.  Hives that are accompanied by difficulty breathing, unusual anxiety and hives occurring 
all over the body needs to be seen by a physician immediately. 
 

Another common rash experienced by children during the summer months is known as Swimmer’s 
Itch.  It is a form of dermatitis (i.e., inflammation of the skin) that is caused by larvae of certain worms 
when they attempt to penetrate the skin.  This results in a mild allergic reaction.  The worms that cause 
Swimmer’s itch are commonly found in water after being excreted from birds, waterfowl and mammals.  
Generally, no treatment is required for the rash since it goes away in a few days and does not cause lasting 
effects.  Swimmer’s Itch is not spread from person-to-person. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CAMPYLOBACTER  (cont.)  

CAMPYLOBACTER 
 
Campylobacteriosis is an intestinal illness caused by How can the spread of this disease be 
the bacterium Campylobacter of which there are prevented? 
many types. 1. Wash hands thoroughly after using the toilet 
 and diapering children. 
Who gets this disease? 2. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
Anyone can.  The illness occurs in all age groups. food. 
 3. Keep children who have diarrhea at home. 
How is it spread? 4. Wash children’s toys frequently, especially 
Campylobacter is spread by the fecal-oral route.  if they have diarrhea.  
Water, milk or food (especially poorly cooked 5. Make sure children wash their hands after 
poultry products) contaminated with handling pets or have contact with animal 
Campylobacter, or contact with infected animals feces. 
may also be a source of infection to people.  6. Symptomatic staff with positive stool 
 cultures for Campylobacter should be 
What are the symptoms? excluded from work. 
Diarrhea (which may be severe and bloody), 7. Always treat raw poultry, beef and pork as if 
stomach cramps, abdominal pain, vomiting and they are contaminated and handle 
fever are the usual symptoms. accordingly. 
 8. Wrap fresh meats in plastic bags at the 
How soon do symptoms appear? market to prevent blood from dripping onto 
The symptoms generally appear between one and other foods. 
seven days, but can take longer. 9. Refrigerate foods promptly; minimize 
 holding at room temperature. 
Can a person have this disease without 10. Avoid ingesting unpasteurized milk.  
knowing it? 11. Use separate cutting boards for raw poultry 

and beef to prevent cross contamination with 
Yes.  Although symptoms usually go away after one other foods. 
to 10 days on their own, there may still be germs in 12. Cutting boards and counters used for 
the stools for several weeks if treatment is not preparation should be washed immediately 
given. after use to prevent cross contamination with 
 other foods. 
What is the treatment? 13. Be certain all foods (especially beef and 
Although antibiotic therapy may not shorten the poultry products) are thoroughly cooked. 
illness, it does shorten the amount of time the germ 
is passed in the stools.  Therefore, in the childcare 
setting, treatment is recommended for adults and 
children with Campylobacter in their stools.  This 
will reduce the chance of spread to others. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CAMPYLOBACTER  (cont.)  
 
Who should be excluded? 
Any person with diarrhea shall be excluded from 
foodhandling, from childcare agencies and from 
direct care of hospitalized or institutionalized 
patients until 48 hours after resolution of symptoms.  
Children can return to childcare once they are no 
longer having diarrhea. 
 
Reportable? 
Yes.  Campylobacteriosis is reportable by New 
Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 
(603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CHICKENPOX (VARICELLA) AND SHINGLE 
(cont.)  

CHICKENPOX (VARICELLA) AND 
SHINGLES 

 
Chickenpox is a very contagious disease caused by  
the varicella-zoster virus.  It usually begins with a How is it spread? 
mild fever and an itchy rash.  The rash starts with Chickenpox is contagious from 1-2 days before the 
crops of small red bumps on the stomach or back rash appears to until the blisters have become 
and spreads to the face and limbs.  The red bumps crusted over.  It is spread by close contact (i.e., 
rapidly become blistered, oozy and then crust over.  sharing breathing space or direct touching contact) 
People may have only a few bumps or may be with infected secretions from the nose, throat or 
totally covered. rash. 
  
Once a person has had chickenpox, the varicella- How soon do symptoms appear? 
zoster virus stays without symptoms in the body’s The symptoms generally appear from 14-16 days 
nerve cells.  In some people (for unknown reasons), after exposure but in some cases can occur as early 
the virus can become active again at some later time as 10 days or as late as 21 days after contact.  
as “shingles” or zoster.  This problem includes a Chickenpox and shingles are usually diagnosed by 
red, painful, itchy, blistery rash, usually in the line the typical appearance of the rashes. 
along one side of the body.  There is no fever.  The  
virus is shed in the blister fluid of the rash and can 
cause chickenpox in a person who has not had it, if What is the treatment? 
that person has direct contact with the infected The chickenpox symptoms may be treated with 
shingles blisters. anti-itching medicine and lotions, fever control, 
 fluids and rest.  Because of a possible association 
Who gets this disease? with Reye’s Syndrome (i.e., vomiting, liver 

 problems and coma), salicylate-containing products 
Anyone who is exposed to chickenpox and has not (i.e., aspirin) should not be used for fever control.  
had it before has a very good chance of developing Acetaminophen may be used for fever control.  
chickenpox.  It is most common in school-aged Scratching should be avoided because it can cause 
children.  If you have had chickenpox once, second infection and scarring.  A medication to decrease 
attacks are very rare.  Shingles is most common in the severity of symptoms is available for high-risk 
adults, as a person must have already had children.  This must be given within 24 hours of the 
chickenpox to develop shingles. onset of rash.  Please consult the Division of Public 
 Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
When a pregnant woman or a person with a weak Control or the child’s physician for more 
immune system who has not had chickenpox is information. 
exposed he/she should contact a physician. 
 
Chickenpox does not cause serious illness in 
healthy children.  Adults may, occasionally, be 
seriously ill with chickenpox. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CHICKENPOX (VARICELLA) AND SHINGLE 
(cont.)  

  
How can the spread of this disease be Reportable? 
prevented? Yes, chickenpox is reportable by New Hampshire 
The ACIP recommends that children attending law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
daycare facilities and schools be vaccinated for Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-
chickenpox.  New Hampshire currently requires 4496  
varicella vaccination for school or daycare 
attendance. The two dose series should be 
completed at 12-15 months and again at 4-6 years. 
 
The ACIP also recommends that daycare workers, 
who have no history of chickenpox disease, be 
tested for immunity.  If testing shows susceptibility, 
2 doses of varicella vaccine should be administered 
separated by one month. 
 
Each childcare facility should have a system so that 
it is notified if a child or staff member develops 
chickenpox or shingles.  This is so the facility may 
take appropriate measures if there is a pregnant or 
immunocompromised member in the facility.  
(Recently the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practice has recommended the use of 
varicella vaccine for susceptible persons who have 
been exposed to varicella). 
 
The childcare facility should watch closely for early 
signs of chickenpox in other children for three 
weeks following the most recent case.  If a child or 
staff member develops a suspicious rash, he/she 
should be sent to his/her healthcare provider so that 
the rash can be diagnosed.  However, chickenpox is 
highly contagious and in spite of your best efforts, 
you will probably have several more cases if 
children have not already had the disease. 
 
Who should be excluded? 
Children should be excluded from daycare after the 
rash eruption first appears and until the vesicles 
become dry and crusted over.  In certain situations 
exposed unvaccinated children without symptoms 
do need to stay at home.  Generally exposed 
children, who have been vaccinated, do not need to 
stay at home.  Adults with shingles should be 
excluded if vesicles/blisters cannot be covered. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



COMMON COLD & INFLUENZA (cont.) 
COMMON COLD & INFLUENZA 

 
Common colds are mild infections of the nose and What is the treatment? 
throat, which are very common in young children While there is medication available, most health 
(and in adults who are around them), and are caused care providers suggest rest and plenty of fluids.  To 
by many different viruses.  Usually the viral illness see if there is bacterial infection in addition to the 
causes some combination of stuffy nose, runny viral infection, a healthcare provider should 
nose, sore throat, cough, runny eyes, ear fluid and evaluate a child who has a high fever, persistent 
fever. cough, or earache.  Because of a possible 
 association with Reye’s Syndrome (i.e., vomiting, 
Influenza (the flu) is also caused by a virus (e.g., liver problems and coma), salicylate-containing 
influenza-A, influenza-B) and causes symptoms of products (i.e., aspirin) are not recommended for 
fever, headache, sore throat, cough, muscle ache control of fever. 
and fatigue.  Most people with influenza feel too ill  
to attend childcare. How can the spread of these diseases be 
 
Occasionally, the common cold or influenza can be prevented? 
complicated by a bacterial infection such as an ear Influenza vaccine is the primary method of 
infection, sinus infections, or pneumonia.  These preventing influenza and its severe complications. 
complications can be treated with appropriate The vaccine should be given annually beginning at 
antibiotics after evaluation by their health care 6 months of age. Two doses should be given the 
provider. first year the child receives the influenza vaccine.  
  
Who gets these diseases? Annual influenza vaccination is recommended for 

 all children aged 6 months through age 18 with 
Anyone can.  Young children may be sick with priority given to the following persons for influenza 
these illnesses several times per year.  As the vaccine if influenza vaccine supplies are limited: 
number of persons in contact with a child increases, • Children 6 months to 18 years 
so does the likelihood of exposure to the common 
viruses that cause the cold and flu. • Pregnant women 
 • Persons aged 50 years old and older 
How are they spread? • Persons of any age with certain chronic 

medical conditions 
The viruses can be transmitted from one person to 
another in respiratory secretions (i.e., saliva, nasal • Persons who live with or care for persons at 
discharge, and phlegm).  Infected droplets may be high risk 
scattered through sneezing or coughing or they may  
land on surfaces touched by other persons, who then Additional ways to prevent the spread of 
touch their eyes, nose or mouth. these diseases: 
 • Get adequate rest, good nutrition, plenty of 
How soon do symptoms appear? fluids 
The symptoms of a common cold appear as soon as • Avoid people who are sick 
12-72 hours after exposure.  The symptoms of • Observe children for symptoms of coughing, 
influenza appear in 1-4 days after exposure, and sneezing, headache, fatigue, fever.  Notify 
typically last 2-3 days. parent to pick child up 
 • Remind children if they sneeze or cough 

into their hand or tissue, they must properly 
dispose of the tissue and wash their hands 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



COMMON COLD & INFLUENZA (cont.) 
• Runny noses and eyes should be promptly 

wiped, then wash their hands 
• Disposable tissues should be used.  Keep 

tissues available 
• Toys that children put in their mouths and 

frequently used surfaces (e.g., tables) should 
be washed and disinfected at least once each 
day 

• The childcare facility should have fresh air 
and be aired out completely once a day, 
even in the winter months 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Children should be excluded if they have a fever or 
are unable to participate in general activities.  
Exclusion is of little benefit since viruses are likely 
to spread. 
 
Reportable? 
No.  Influenza is not reportable, but please notify 
the Division of Public Health Services, Bureau of 
Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-4496 of 
influenza outbreaks.  The common cold is not 
reportable. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CONJUNCTIVITIS (Pink Eye) cont. 

CONJUNCTIVITIS (Pink Eye) 
 
Conjunctivitis is an infection of the eyes commonly The incubation period varies depending upon the 
known as “pink eye”.  Conjunctivitis can be cause whether it is viral or bacterial; symptoms may 
purulent or nonpurulent.  It is most often caused by develop in 5 –12 days depending on the cause.  
a virus (like those which cause the common cold), (Bacterial 24-72 hours, viral 12 hours to 12 days). 
but can also be caused by bacteria, allergies or  
chemicals.  The conjunctiva – the clear layer over How is it diagnosed and treated? 
the whites of the eyes – becomes pink and there Signs and symptoms of purulent conjunctivitis are 
may be tearing and discharge from the eyes.  Eyes white or colored discharge from the eye, eye 
may be itchy or even painful.  In the morning, the redness, eyelid swelling, eye pain, and sometime 
discharge may make the eyelids stick together.  fever.  It is often difficult to tell if the cause is 
Conjunctivitis is a mild illness.  Viral conjunctivitis bacterial or viral.  Occasionally the doctor will 
will go away by itself in one to three weeks. examine the discharge under the microscope or 
 culture it.  Often an antibiotic eye medicine will be 
Who gets this disease? given because treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis 
Anyone can get it.  Conjunctivitis is caused by a shortens the length of symptoms and decreases 
virus or bacterium and is highly contagious.  infectiousness.  There is not treatment for viral 
Preschoolers and school-age children have it most conjunctivitis; it will go away by itself but may last 
often and can spread it to people taking care of them a week or more. 
or to each other.  
 Signs and symptoms of nonpurulent conjunctivitis 
How is it spread? are clear watery discharge from the eye, without eye 
Both viral and bacterial conjunctivitis spread by redness or pain or fever.   
contact with discharge from the eye.  Children often  
pass it along by rubbing their eyes and getting How can the spread of this disease be 
discharge on their hands and then: prevented? 
a) Touches another child’s eye. 1. Follow hand washing and center cleanliness 
b) Touches another child’s hands.  The second guidelines. 

child then touches his/her eyes. 2. Teach children to avoid rubbing their eyes 
c) Touches an object.  Another child touches the 3. Keep children’s eyes wiped free of 

object and then puts his/her hands into his/her discharge. 
eyes. 4. Always use disposable tissues/towels for 

 wiping and washing.  Never use the same 
Staff washing, drying or wiping a child’s face and tissue/towel for more than one child. 
then using the same washcloth/towel/paper 5. Always wash your hands after wiping a 
towel/tissue on another child’s face can also pass it child’s eyes. 
along.  Staff could also get eye discharge on their 6. Teach children to wash their hands after 
hands when wiping a child’s eyes and then pass it wiping their eyes. 
along as outlined above. 7. Dispose of tissues/towels in lined, covered 

container kept away from food and childcare 
materials.

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



CONJUNCTIVITIS (Pink Eye) cont. 
 

8. Be sure articles that may touch children’s 
eyes (e.g., pillowcases, sheets, towels 
binoculars, prisms, toy cameras) are washed 
well with soap and hot water at least once 
daily. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
It is recommended that children and staff with 
purulent conjunctivitis be excluded from childcare 
until examined by a healthcare provider and 
approved for re-admission, with or without 
treatment. Children with nonpurulent conjunctivitis 
do not need to be excluded from childcare. 
 
 
Reportable? 
No. Conjunctivitis is not reportable by New 
Hampshire state law to the Division of Public 
Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control.  However, Public Health Professionals are 
available for consultation at (603) 271-4496. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DIARRHEA (Infectious Diarrhea) 
 

Diarrhea is defined as: 1) an increase in the How is it spread? 
number of stools over what is normal for that The germs that can cause infectious diarrhea are 
person, and 2) stools which are not formed (i.e., spread by fecal-oral route. 
loose and watery and take the shape of the  
container they are in).  (NOTE: Breast-fed babies How is it diagnosed and treated? 
may have stools that are normally not formed). The germs can be diagnosed by stool cultures or 
 by looking at stool under a microscope for eggs or 
There are two (2) general types of diarrhea:  parasites.  (The healthcare provider will ask for a 
infectious and non-infectious. stool sample and send it to a laboratory for 
 analysis).  The physician will decide on 
Infectious Diarrhea is caused by a virus, appropriate treatment. 
parasite, or bacterium.  It can spread quickly from  
person-to-person, especially in daycare centers.  
Some of the causes of infectious diarrhea, such as How can the spread of diarrhea be 
Campylobacteriosis, shiga-toxin producing E. prevented? 
coli, giardiasis, salmonellosis and shigellosis, are Hand washing is the most important way to stop 
discussed in their own fact sheets found in this the spread.  Specific methods for preventing the 
document.  There are other agents that can also spread of infectious diarrhea are discussed in each 
cause infectious diarrhea in children.  These fact sheet. 
include parasites (e.g., cryptosporidiosis, amoeba)  
other bacterial (e.g., yersinia) and other viruses Who should be excluded? 
(e.g., Rotavirus).  Although these other disease- Any person with diarrhea shall be excluded from 
causing organisms are not discussed in detail, the food handling, from childcare agencies and from 
general principles outlined in this section are direct care of hospitalized or institutionalized 
applicable to prevent the spread of any of these patients until 48 hours after resolution of 
germs. symptoms.. Children who have 2 or more stools 
 above their normal amount should be excluded as 
Non-infectious Diarrhea can be caused by toxins it impedes the caregiver’s ability to care for the 
(e.g., certain types of food poisoning), chronic children and maintain sanitary conditions. For 
diseases (e.g., cystic fibrosis) or antibiotics (e.g., diarrhea caused by a specific agent, see the related 
ampicillin).  Non-infectious diarrhea DOES NOT fact sheet to learn if exclusion is necessary. 
spread from person-to-person.  
 Reportable? 
Who gets it? Non-specific diarrhea is not reportable.  Clusters 
Anyone can catch infectious diarrhea.  It can of diarrhea illness in a facility should be reported 
spread especially quickly among babies and to the Division of Public Health Services, Bureau 
young children who are not toilet-trained or who of Infectious Disease and Control at (603) 271-
may not wash their hands well after going to the 4496.  
bathroom.  It can also easily spread to the adults 
taking care of them and helping them with 
diapering and toileting. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



DIPHTHERIA 
 

Diphtheria is a potentially serious bacterial months, 6 months, and 15-18 months, and 4-6 
infection of the nose and throat. years of age.  
 Patients and carriers of diphtheria should receive 
Who gets this disease? appropriate treatment and not return to childcare 
Diphtheria occurs primarily among unimmunized until two (2) cultures from both the nose and 
or inadequately immunized people. throat (and from skin sores in cutaneous 
 diptheria), are negative for the bacteria.  These 
How is it spread? cultures should be taken at least 24 hours apart 
The bacteria are spread by direct contact with and no sooner than 24 hours after finishing 
discharge from the nose, throat, skin, eyes, or antibiotic treatment.  Where culture is impractical, 
from sores of infected persons.  Articles or food isolation may be ended after 14 days of 
contaminated with discharge can also spread appropriate treatment. 
infection.  
 Who should be excluded? 
What are the symptoms? Children and staff should be excluded until 
Diphtheria causes a sore throat and swollen bacteriological examination proves them not to be 
tonsils, with a grayish covering and swollen carriers. 
glands in the neck.  It can lead to severe throat  
swelling that can block breathing.  The bacteria Reportable? 
also produce a toxin (a type of poisonous Yes, Diphtheria is reportable by New Hampshire 
substance) that can cause severe and permanent law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
damage to the nervous system and heart.   Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 
 271-4496.  
What is the Treatment? 
Diphtheria is treated primarily with an antitoxin, 
along with antibiotics.  Antibiotics are also given 
to the carriers of the diphtheria (e.g., people who 
test positive for diphtheria but who are not sick). 
Individuals who have been in contact with an 
infected person and are not adequately vaccinated 
should receive a booster.  
 
How can the spread of this disease be 
prevented? 
The combination vaccine Diphtheria, Tetanus and 
acellular Pertussis (DTap), is required for both 
childcare and school attendance.  The Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
recommends immunizing children against 
diphtheria, along with pertussis and tetanus, 
beginning as early as six weeks of age.  The five 
dose series should be completed at 2 months, 4 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



E. COLI 0157:H7 
 
E. coli 0157:H7 is an intestinal illness caused by a How soon do symptoms appear? 
bacterium that can cause severe bloody diarrhea, Symptoms appear 12-72 hours after exposure with 
anemia, and –in some cases- kidney failure. the average being 48 hours. 
  
Who gets this disease? Can a person have this disease without 
Anyone is susceptible to this particular category of knowing it? 
E. coli 0157:H7, but it most seriously affects young Yes.  The organism is identified through stool 
children and the elderly. culture testing.  Usually symptoms disappear in a 
 few days but the bacteria can remain in the 
How is it spread? intestinal tract for several weeks. 
This bacterium lives in a small number of healthy  
cattle.  When the infected animal is slaughtered, the What is the treatment? 
meat can become contaminated.  The bacteria may Seek medical help for identification of the 
also contaminate raw milk by being present on the organism.  Usually the person is treated for diarrhea 
cow’s udder. dehydration with fluid replacement. 
  
E. coli 0157:H7 is spread by eating contaminated 
food – most often undercooked beef, especially How can the spread of this disease be 
undercooked ground beef.  Contaminated meat prevented? 
looks and smells normal.  Drinking unpasteurized 1. Wash hands thoroughly after diapering and 
milk and swimming in or drinking sewage- using the bathroom. 
contaminated water can also cause infection. 2. Avoid eating undercooked beef, especially 
 hamburger.   
An infected person having diarrhea can pass the 3. Avoid drinking from unknown water sources,, 
bacteria from one person to another if hand-washing raw milk, and unpasteurized apple juice. 
habits are not adequate.  This is more likely to 4. Teach children good hand washing techniques 
happen among toddlers who are not toilet trained.  
 Who should be excluded? 
Young children usually continue to shed the Children who are infected with this bacterium will 
bacteria in their stool a week or two following their be excluded from childcare while they are 
illness. symptomatic.  Infected adults should be excluded 
 from childcare centers, food handling, and direct 
What are the symptoms? care healthcare, until their stool cultures are free of 
They vary from mild diarrhea to a bloody diarrhea E. coli 0157:H7 on two (2) consecutive specimens 
with severe abdominal cramps and little or no fever.  collected not less than 24-hours apart.  If antibiotics 
Vomiting may occur late in the illness.  A small have been given, the initial cultures should be 
percent may develop hemolytic uremic syndrome obtained at least 48-hours after the last dose. 
(HUS), a condition that destroys the red blood cells  
and causes kidney failure.  This is more likely to Reportable? 
occur in children under five years of age and the Yes.  E. coli 0157:H7 is reportable by New 
elderly, and may lead to death. Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
 Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 

(603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS (cont.) 

EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS 
 
What is eastern equine encephalitis? Who is at risk for eastern equine 
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) is an uncommon encephalitis? 
but serious disease caused by EEE virus.  EEE is an Anyone can get EEE, but some people are at 
arbovirus (short for arthropod-borne, meaning increased risk, such as people living in or visiting 
spread by insects).  The virus can be transmitted to areas where the disease is common and people who 
horses, other animals, and in rare cases, people. work outside or participate in outdoor recreational 
 activities in areas where the disease is common. 
How do people get eastern equine Children and those over age 50 are more susceptible 
encephalitis? to the disease.  The risk of getting EEE is highest 
The EEE virus grows in birds that live in freshwater from late July through September. 
swamps.  The virus has a complex life cycle  
involving birds and a specific type of mosquito, What is the treatment for eastern equine 
called Culiseta melanura.  This particular mosquito encephalitis? 
does not bite people.  Sometimes though, the virus There is no specific treatment for eastern equine 
can escape from its marsh habitat by means of other encephalitis.  Antibiotics are not effective against 
mosquitoes that feed on both birds and mammals.  viruses, and no effective anti-viral drugs have yet 
These mosquitoes can transmit the virus to animals been discovered.  Care of the patient centers around 
and people. treatment of symptoms and complications. 
  
What are the symptoms of EEE? How common is eastern equine 
Infection can cause a range of illnesses.  Most encephalitis? 
people have no symptoms; others get only a mild EEE is a rare disease.  An average of 6 cases are 
flu-like illness with fever, headache, and sore throat.  reported in the United States in most years.  There 
For people with infection of the central nervous is concern, however, that EEE is re-emerging.  In 
system, a sudden high fever (103 to 106 ), severe NH, EEE has been found in horses, mosquitoes and 
headache, and stiff neck can be followed quickly by several species of birds.  In 2014, 3 cases of EEE 
seizures and coma.  About one third of these were reported in humans in NH.   
patients die from the disease.  Of those that survive,  
many suffer permanent brain damage and require 
lifetime institutional care. How can eastern equine encephalitis be 
 prevented? 
How soon after exposure do symptoms A vaccine is available for horses, but not for 
appear? humans.  Prevention of the disease centers around 

 controlling mosquitoes and on individual action to 
Symptoms of EEE usually appear 4 to 10 days after avoid mosquito bites.  To avoid being bitten by the 
the bite of an infected mosquito. mosquitoes that transmits EEE: 
 • If possible, stay inside between dusk and dawn, 
How is eastern equine encephalitis when mosquitoes are most active 
diagnosed? • When outside between dusk and dawn, wear 
Diagnosis is based on tests of blood or spinal fluid. long pants and long-sleeved shirts 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



EASTERN EQUINE ENCEPHALITIS (cont.) 
 
• Use an insect repellent with DEET or Picaridin 

according to the manufacturer’s directions 
when outside.  Oil of lemon eucalyptus and 
IR3535 have been found to provide protection 
similar to repellents with low concentrations of 
DEET 

• Clothing can be treated with permethrin 
according to the manufacturer’s directions 

• When possible wearing long sleeves and pants 
while outside 

• Put screens on windows and make sure they do 
not have holes 

• Eliminate standing water and other mosquito 
breeding locations from your property.  Do not 
alter natural water bodies.  The management of 
ponds and wetlands is regulated by the 
Department of Environmental Services and any 
alterations require a permit before work may 
begin 

 
For more information about eastern equine 
encephalitis, call the New Hampshire Department 
of Health & Human Services, Bureau of Infectious 
Disease Control at (603) 271-4496 or visit our 
website at www.dhhs.nh.gov or the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc.gov.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



FIFTH DISEASE (cont.) 

FIFTH DISEASE 
 
Fifth disease is an illness caused by a virus called How soon do symptoms appear? 
human parvovirus B19.  Although people may be It takes from 4-21 days after exposure to develop 
asymptomatic with the illness, most children with it the characteristic rash illness of Fifth disease.   
develop a facial rash (i.e., “slapped check” People with the rash are past the period of 
appearance) and a lace-like rash on the trunk and infectiousness to others.  The highest risk of 
extremities.  The rash may reappear for several transmitting the Fifth disease virus to others is felt 
weeks following exposure to non-specific stimuli to occur before the rash develops. 
such as sunlight, change in temperature or  
emotional stress. How is it diagnosed and treated? 
 A healthcare provider based on the characteristic 
Except for the rash, the patient is typically rash and any other accompanying symptoms may 
otherwise well:  but some give a history of mild diagnose Fifth disease.  There is no specific 
general symptoms one to four days before rash treatment for Fifth disease. 
onset.  Fever, sore throat or pain and swelling in the  
joints may also occur. 
 How can the spread of this disease be 
Who gets this disease? prevented? 
Although most commonly recognized in children, 1. Because transmission of the Fifth disease 
anyone is susceptible.  Studies indicate previous virus usually occurs before the rash develops 
infection with Fifth disease correlates with a lower – when a child may seem well or has a non-
risk of a second infection.  Outbreaks in schools specific illness – excluding children with the 
often begin in late winter or early spring and may Fifth disease rash is of no proven value.  
continue until the school year is over. However, it is very important for a 
 healthcare provider to rule out other rash-
In the U.S. about 50% of the adult population are causing illnesses (e.g., measles, chickenpox) 
already immune to the disease.  Some studies that may require exclusion from childcare. 
indicate the pregnant women who are exposed to 2. Transmission of infection can be lessened by 
Fifth disease and subsequently develop infection routine hygienic practices for control of 
may have an increased risk for fetal death.  respiratory infections, which include hand 
However, this risk is felt to be extremely low.  washing and disposal of facial tissues 
There is no evidence that the infection during containing respiratory secretions. 
pregnancy causes fetal malformations (i.e., birth 3. People with particular concerns about 
defects).  Pregnant childcare workers should contact contracting Fifth disease (e.g., pregnant 
their obstetricians. women) should consult their healthcare 
 providers. 
How is it spread? 
The virus that causes Fifth disease has been found 
in the respiratory secretions of patients and is, 
therefore, most likely spread by direct person-to-
person contact through the respiratory route. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



FIFTH DISEASE (cont.) 
Who should be excluded? 
Children with Fifth disease MAY attend daycare or 
school, as they are not contagious after onset of 
rash.  Routine exclusion of pregnant women from 
the workplace where Fifth disease is occurring is 
not recommended. 
 
Reportable? 
No, Fifth disease is not reportable by New 
Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  
However, Public Health Professionals are available 
for consultation at (603) 271-4496. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



GIARDIASIS 
 

Giardiasis is an intestinal illness caused by Can a person have this disease without 
Giardia lamblia, a microscopic parasite.  The knowing it? 
infectious form of the parasite is passed in the Yes.  Some people may have very mild infections 
stool of an infected individual. that are not serious enough to cause them to go to 
 a doctor.  They may not feel sick at all.  In some 
Who gets this disease? cases of giardia infection, parasites can be found 
Anyone can get Giardiasis.  It is very common in in the stool from several days to several months 
childcare centers; especially those that have after the symptoms have stopped. 
children under age three.  It spreads easily among  
these children to their caretakers and families. What is the treatment? 
 Several drugs are effective in killing the giardia 
How is it spread? parasite.  Treatment is usually necessary for 
The most common way a person becomes persons with diarrhea. 
infected with giardia in the childcare setting is by  
the fecal-oral route.  Eating food contaminated How can the spread of this disease be 
with the parasite may also infect a person.  Food 
may become contaminated when the person prevented? 
preparing the food has giardiasis and has some 1. Wash hands thoroughly after using the 
infected stool on his/her hands because of poor toilet and diapering a child. 
hand washing habits. 2. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
 food. 
Additionally, a person may become infected by 3. Keep children who have diarrhea at home. 
drinking water that is contaminated with the 4. Staff with stool positive for giardia should 
parasite.  Streams, ponds and springs in New not prepare food or feed children. 
Hampshire are frequently contaminated with  
giardiasis parasites.  Water can also be Who should be excluded? 
contaminated with giardia when sewage enters the Any person with diarrhea shall be excluded from 
drinking water supply. food handling, from childcare agencies and from 
 direct care of hospitalized or institutionalized 
What are the symptoms? patients until 48 hours after resolution of 
The most common symptoms of a giardia symptoms  
infection are diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramping, Reportable? 
decreased appetite and excess gas.  There is Yes, giardiasis is reportable by New Hampshire 
usually no fever or vomiting.  The diarrhea may law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
last up to several months and can cause significant Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 
weight loss. 271-4496.  
 
How soon do the symptoms appear? 
The symptoms appear within 5-25 days or longer.  
The average incubation period is 1-3 weeks. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZA TYPE-B (cont.) 

HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZAE 
TYPE-B (aka Hib Disease) 

 
Haemophilus influenzae type-b (Hib) is a persons with nose or throat carriage is greatly 
bacterium that causes serious, sometimes fatal increased; thus, risk of serious disease is also 
illnesses, most often in young children.  Some of increased. 
the diseases it can cause include: meningitis (an How is it diagnosed and treated? 
infection of the coverings of the brain), epiglottitis Illnesses caused by Haemophilus influenzae type-
(an infection of the upper throat and entrance of b are diagnosed by signs and symptoms and by 
the windpipe), cellulitis (an infection of the deep examining the blood and/or spinal fluid for white 
tissues, especially of the face and neck), septic blood cells and bacteria.  Spinal fluid is obtained 
arthritis (an infection and swelling of the joints), by a physician performing a lumbar puncture (i.e., 
pneumonia (an infection of the lung), and spinal tap). 
bacteremia (blood stream) infections.  
 How can the spread of this disease be 
Who gets this disease? prevented? 
This illness is primarily seen in unimmunized 1. If a person develops an illness caused by 
children under four years of age.  Children under Hib, close contacts of this patient 
age two are most susceptible because their (including family members and persons 
immune systems are not yet able to fight the having intimate contact such as sleeping 
bacteria.  Rarely, older children and adults may together, hugging and kissing) are at 
develop infection. increased risk of developing the illness.  In 
 this situation a physician may recommend: 
It appears that in a setting such as the household 1) carefully watching for early symptoms 
or childcare facility – where there are young of illness caused by Haemophilus 
children and everyone is in close contact – there is influenzae and/or 2) taking a preventive 
an increased risk of one of these contacts antibiotic to eliminate the bacteria from 
developing Hib infection following a first case. the body before disease begins. 
 2. Any child or adult contact that develops 
How is it spread? symptoms consistent with Hib infection 
The bacterium is passed from person-to-person by requires evaluation by a heath care 
breathing in infected droplets of nose or throat provider regardless of whether or not this 
fluids scattered in the air or by direct contact with person has taken preventive antibiotics. 
these infected secretions.  The bacteria cannot live 3. A vaccination against Hib infection is 
on environmental surfaces – they quickly shrivel available and the Advisory Committee on 
and die. Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
 recommends that all children begin the 
Like meningococcus, some people can “carry” vaccine series against  Hib infection at two 
this bacterium for a period of time without it months of age. The four dose series should 
causing illness.  However, a carrier may spread be completed at 2 months, 4 months, 6 
the bacteria to another person who may then months, and 12-15 months.  
become ill.  In a household or childcare center in 
which Hib infection has occurred, the number of 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HAEMOPHILUS INFLUENZA TYPE-B (cont.) 

 
4. For unvaccinated children age 15 months 

or older only 1 dose of the Hib vaccine is 
required.  

5. The Hib vaccine is not required for 
children over age 5.  

6. Children in childcare aged 3-60 months 
are required to have age appropriate Hib 
vaccination in order to attend.  Parents 
with specific questions about the Hib 
vaccine and their child should contact their 
child’s physician.  The vaccination is not 
required for school entry. 

7. Notify parents or guardians about the 
occurrence of this illness and urge them to 
contact their physicians for specific 
medical care advice. 

8. Contact the Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control for recommendations about 
preventing the spread of this illness and 
assistance in implementing them. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Children and staff who are ill with Hib infection 
should be excluded while they are ill and until 24 
hours of antibiotic therapy has been completed. 
 
Reportable? 
Yes, Haemophilus influenzae infections are 
reportable by New Hampshire law to the Bureau 
of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HAND, FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE 
 
Hand, foot and mouth disease is a self-limited  
infection caused by the Coxsackie A16 virus and Can a person have this disease without 
enterovirus 71.  Vesicular lesions (i.e., blisters) knowing it? 
may appear in the mouth, on the sides of the Yes.  Infected persons who may not seem sick are 
tongue, inside the cheek and on the gums.  able to spread infection.  The virus may persist in 
Lesions may also occur on the palms, fingers, the stool for several weeks after the acute illness 
soles and buttocks.  Most lesions persist for 7-10 is over. 
days.  A low-grade fever may accompany the  
illness for one to two days.  The infection usually 
goes away without any serious complications. How is it diagnosed and treated? 
 A healthcare provider may diagnose hand, foot 
Who gets this disease? and mouth disease based on clinical signs and 

 symptoms.  There is no specific treatment. 
The infection is seen primarily in children under  
10 years old but may also occur in adults.  
Outbreaks of hand, foot and mouth disease among How can the spread of this disease be 
groups of children in nursery schools and prevented? 
childcare centers during the summer and early fall 1. Wash your hands thoroughly after using 
are common. the toilet and diapering a child. 
 2. Wash hands thoroughly after handling 
How is it spread? respiratory discharges, stool and soiled 
Having direct contact with nose and throat articles of infected persons. 
secretions of an infected person may spread the 3. Discourage children from putting toys and 
infection.  It may also be spread by the aerosol other objects in their mouths. 
droplet route (e.g., sneezing, coughing). 4. Clean and disinfect toys and contaminated 
 areas (e.g., diapering area, potty chairs, 
Additionally, the virus may also be spread by toilets) daily and when soiled. 
having contact with infected persons who may not 5. Do not allow children to share drinking 
seem sick (aka carriers) but are able to spread the cups or eating utensils. 
infection since the virus may persist in the stool 6. Teach children to sneeze and cough into a 
for several weeks after the acute illness is over. tissue, or into their elbow and away from 
 other people. 
What are the symptoms? 7. Dispose of tissues and diapers properly; 

 wash hands after sneezing, coughing, 
Vesicular lesions may occur in the mouth, on the changing diapers and using the toilets. 
sides of the tongue, inside the cheek and on the 8. Children may attend childcare if they feel 
gums.  Lesions also occur on the palms, fingers, well enough even if lesions are still 
soles and buttocks.  Most lesions persist for 7-10 present.  In this situation, childcare staff 
days.  A low-grade fever may accompany the should be especially careful to adhere to 
illness for one to two days. steps 1-7 above. 
 9. Grouping of symptomatic individuals, 
How soon do symptoms appear? where practical, might be considered. 
People who are going to contract the infection 
usually do so three to six days after exposure. 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HAND, FOOT & MOUTH DISEASE (cont.) 

Who should be excluded? 
Exclusion from a childcare facility or school is 
not recommended.  Special attention to hand 
washing after toileting is required. 
 
Reportable? 
No.  Hand, foot and mouth disease are not 
reportable by New Hampshire law to the Division 
of Public Health Services, Bureau of Infectious 
Disease Control.  However, Public Health 
Professionals are available for consultation at 
(603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HEPATITIS A 
 

Hepatitis A is an infection of the liver caused by  
the hepatitis A virus. In addition, people with hepatitis A are most 
 likely to spread the disease to others during a 
Who gets this disease? period extending from 14 days before developing 
Anyone can.  It can spread quickly in groups of symptoms to one week after symptoms develop.  
small children who are not yet toilet-trained and This means that a person may be infectious to 
who cannot wash their own hands well. others before even realizing he or she is ill. 
  
How is it spread? What is the treatment? 
Hepatitis A virus is passed out of the body in the There is no treatment that cures hepatitis A.  
stool and is spread by the fecal-oral route, just like However, there are two shots available to help 
infectious diarrhea.  Contact with stool- prevent illness in people exposed to patients with 
contaminated food, drink or environment surfaces hepatitis A.  These protective shots – either 
(e.g., toilet seat, changing table) can spread the hepatitis A vaccine or Hepatitis A immune 
infection.  globulin (IG) – must be given within two weeks 
 of a person’s exposure to hepatitis A in order for 
What are the symptoms? it to be helpful.  A person’s healthcare provider 
The symptoms vary greatly, ranging from none at and the New Hampshire Division of Public Health 
all to severe illness.  Early symptoms can include Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control 
loss of appetite, nausea, aching, fever, and will assist in making recommendations about 
stomachache.  Later signs can include dark administering hepatitis A vaccine or IG to 
colored urine, light colored stools and jaundice contacts. 
(i.e., yellowing of white of eyes, eyes or skin).   
(Note: jaundice occurs more often among adults How can the spread of this disease be 
than children).  These symptoms usually last from prevented? 
one to two weeks, although some adults may be 1. Hepatitis A vaccine is recommended for 
sick for several months. children 12-23 months.  The Advisory 
 Committee on Immunization Practices 
How soon do symptoms appear? (ACIP), recommends immunizing children 
After the hepatitis A virus is ingested, it is against Hepatitis A. 
between 15-50 days before illness begins.  Most 2. The two dose series should be given at 12 
commonly, it begins within 25-30 days. and 18 months of age Children who are 
 not vaccinated by age 2 years can be 
Can a person have this disease without vaccinated at subsequent visits. 
knowing it? 3. Wash hands thoroughly after using the 
Yes.  This is especially important in the childcare toilet.   
setting because most young children with hepatitis 4. Wash hands thoroughly after diapering 
A do not become ill.  Children with hepatitis A children. 
without symptoms who are in diapers could easily 5. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
pass the virus to unsuspecting childcare facility food. 
staff and family members. 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HEPATITIS A (cont.) 

6. Clean toilet facilities thoroughly and wash 
hands afterward. 

7. Discourage children from putting non-
food items into their mouths since these 
items may be a source of the virus. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Persons with hepatitis A (or suspected 
hepatitis A) should be excluded from daycare 
centers, food-handling occupations, and direct 
care of hospitalized and institutionalized 
patients for one week after the onset of 
symptoms (jaundice) or hepatitis A has been 
ruled out.  A Public Health Professional will 
advise individuals regarding specific 
recommendations. 
 
Reportable? 
Yes, hepatitis A is reportable by New 
Hampshire law to the Division of Public 
Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control at (603) 271-4496. 
It is important that cases associated with a 
childcare center be reported as soon as 
possible.  A Public Health Professional will 
give specific recommendations for 
immunization of the people exposed. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HEPATITIS B 
 

Hepatitis B is a disease primarily of the liver caused How can the spread of this disease be 
by the hepatitis B virus. prevented? 
 1. Hepatitis B vaccine is required for all 
Who gets this disease? children in childcare and school attendance 
In the United States, hepatitis B is primarily a for all children born after January 1, 1993.    
disease of young adults.  Children can be infected The Advisory Committee on Immunization 
during childbirth if the mother has the virus in her Practices (ACIP), recommends immunizing 
blood. children against hepatitis B. The three dose 
 series should be completed at birth, 1-2 
How is it spread? months of age, and 6-18 months of age. 
Only blood, semen, vaginal fluids and saliva have (Please see Immunization requirements page 
been shown to be infectious.  Most cases are for adult immunization recommendations). 
transmitted by blood (i.e., getting blood from an 2. Standard precautions should be in effect at 
infected person into the open skin or the eye, nose all times.  Disposable gloves should be used 
or mouth of another person), or through sexual when dealing with any bodily fluids 
contact. Note:  salivary transmission has rarely (blood/body fluid-soiled items, surfaces or 
occurred and generally through bites. The Hepatitis clothing), when administering first aid (nose 
virus can live on the surface of objects for 7 days or bleeds, cuts, scrapes, etc). 
more.  3. Disinfect surfaces and objects that are 
 contaminated with blood or other body 
What are the signs and symptoms? fluids containing visible blood.  One-part 
Hepatitis B signs and symptoms include loss of bleach to 10 parts of water can be used as a 
appetite, tiredness, abdominal pain, nausea, disinfectant for cleaning contaminated 
vomiting, and sometimes rash or joint pain.  surfaces.  The bleach mixture must be 
Jaundice (yellowing of eyes or skin), may be changed daily. 
present in adults but it is often absent in children.  4. Wash hands immediately after contact with 
Symptoms vary from none at all to severe illness. blood or other body fluids containing visible 
 blood, even if gloves have been worn. 
Can a person have this disease without  
knowing it? Who should be excluded? 
Yes.  Some people may not have the illness serious Children and staff who have the hepatitis B virus in 
enough to seek medical attention.  People who their blood may attend and/or work in childcare and 
contract hepatitis B may become chronic carriers of schools.  Hepatitis B carrier children with risk 
the virus and continue to be infectious for life factors (e.g., biting, frequent scratching, generalized 
especially if they are infected as young children. dermatitis) should be assessed for exclusion on an 
 individual basis.  
What is the treatment?  
No medical treatment is effective for acute hepatitis Reportable? 
B.  Most adults recover from hepatitis B without Yes.  Hepatitis B is reportable by New Hampshire 
intervention. law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
 Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-

4496.  
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



HIV/AIDS CONT. 

HIV/AIDS 
 
The human immunodeficiency virus – or HIV for nucleic acid detection or antigen test are useful in 
short – is the name of the virus that causes the determining HIV infection in these children. 
condition known as AIDS (Acquired  
Immunodeficiency Syndrome).  HIV attacks the What are the symptoms? 
body’s immune system and makes it unable to There are a wide range of signs and symptoms 
fight-off certain infections and cancers. seen in HIV-infected children.  Symptoms may 
 include failure to thrive, weight loss, fever, mild 
How do children get HIV? or severe developmental delay, neurologic 
The primary method that children become deterioration and severe, prolonged or recurrent 
infected with HIV is through maternal infections.  In general, the interval from HIV 
transmission (i.e., the transfer of HIV) from infection to the onset of symptoms is shorter in 
mother-to-child during pregnancy, childbirth or children than adults due to the developing and 
breastfeeding.  If medical treatment is used in immature immune system.  For this reason, HIV 
combination with obstetric care and an elective infected women should seek medical care and 
caesarian section, transmission is reduced to an treatment early on in a pregnancy. 
only 2% chance of infant transmission.  
 Should children with HIV be enrolled in 
Can HIV be spread in childcare childcare? 
settings? Yes.  Studies continue to show no evidence of 
No documented cases of HIV infection have been transmission of HIV within the childcare setting.  
traced to kissing, biting, playing with an infected HIV infected children should therefore be 
child, or sharing food, eating utensils, toys or enrolled in daycare if their health, neurologic 
bathroom facilities. development, behavior and immune status are 
 appropriate.  The decision as to whether or not a 
Sexual transmission of HIV child with known HIV infection may be enrolled 
With individuals that are positive, HIV is found in in childcare should be made on a case-by-case 
blood, mother’s milk, semen and vaginal basis.  The decision is best made by the child’s 
secretions.  HIV transmission as a result of anal, healthcare provider. 
oral, or vaginal intercourse has been well  
documented.  HIV infection can also occur as a Reportable? 
result of sexual abuse in children. Yes, both HIV infection and AIDS are reportable 
 by New Hampshire law to the Division of Public 
How is HIV diagnosed? Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
For adults rapid HIV tests are available and are Control at (603) 271-4496.  
used in NH.  To confirm a rapid test, people 
should still receive a blood test.  A blood test 
involves testing for the HIV antibody.  However, 
use of HIV-antibody testing in children less than 
18 months old may be confounded by the 
presence of maternally acquired HIV antibodies.  
Other laboratory tests such as viral culture, 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



IMPETIGO 
 

Impetigo is a very common skin infection caused  
by streptococcal or staphylococcal bacteria.  It How is it diagnosed and treated? 
may start at an injured spot on the skin, such as an Most of the time, impetigo can be diagnosed by 
insect bite, cut or burn.  Bacteria can easily be the way it looks.  Bacterial cultures are not usually 
spread by the person’s hands to other areas of the needed.  Strep and staph impetigo may look the 
body.  In children, the face is often involved.  The same, although staph tends to cause blisters more 
rash appears red, is elevated and may secrete fluid.  often. 
The rash may have a flat honey-colored crust.  The  
area may be itchy.  The staph bacteria can cause How can the spread of this disease be 
blisters that break easily and leave raw red skin 
exposed.  Impetigo caused by strep bacteria can be prevented? 
associated in very rare circumstances with the 1. If children hurt themselves and cause 
development of a kidney disease.  Impetigo is breaks in the skin, wash the area 
most commonly seen in the warm summer thoroughly with soap and water and dry 
months. carefully. 
 2. If you think a child may have impetigo: 
Who gets this disease? a. Wash the rash with soap and water 

 and cover it loosely with gauze, a 
Ordinarily the skin protects the body from bandage, or clothing. 
bacteria.  When the skin is broken (i.e., cut, b. Be sure anyone who touches the 
scraped, bitten, scratched), bacteria can get under rash wears disposable gloves 
the surface, multiply and cause an infection. carefully. 
 c. Dispose of any soiled tissues, 
Children – who typically touch everything and bandages and gloves carefully.  
wash only under duress – are likely to have Keep any dirty clothing in a plastic 
multiple cuts and scrapes on their bodies at all bag and give to the parent for 
times, which make them more vulnerable to laundering at home. 
impetigo than adults.  Most children have 3. Ask the parents to have the child seen by 
impetigo at least a few times during their growing his/her healthcare provider. Keep 
up years; adults can get it as well. children’s finger nails short as to prevent 
 damage from scratching.  
How is it spread?  
The bacteria are under, on and in the infected skin, Who should be excluded? 
and they are shed into the secretions and crusts.  It is recommended that untreated children and 
They can be spread to another person who directly staff be excluded from the childcare facility until 
touches the infected skin or a surface 24-hours after they have begun treatment. 
contaminated by the secretions or crusts.  If the 
bacteria then gets under the top protective skin  
layer of the second person, they multiply and Reportable? 
cause infection. No.  Impetigo is not reportable by New Hampshire 
 law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
The incubation period for this disease is variable:  Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  However, 
Staph infections 4-10 days, Strep infections 1-3 Public Health Professionals are available for 
days. consultation at (603) 271-4496. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



LYME DISEASE (cont.) 

LYME DISEASE 
 
Lyme disease is caused by a bacterium, Borrelia What are the symptoms? 
burgdorferi.  In New England it is transmitted by The illness usually occurs during the summer 
a certain type of tick, commonly called the deer months and generally starts as a large circular 
tick or black-legged tick (scientific name: Ixodes reddish expanding rash around or near the site of 
scapularis).  Lyme disease may cause symptoms the tick bite.  (NOTE: In some cases, a rash may 
affecting the skin, nervous system, heart and/or not occur).  Multiple rash sites may occur.  
joints of an individual.  The NH Department of During the rash stage, or occasionally prior to the 
Health & Health Services made Lyme disease rash, other symptoms such as fever, headache, 
reportable in October 1990.  During recent years, fatigue, stiff neck and muscle and/or joint pain 
the incidence of Lyme disease has increased in may be present.  These may last for several 
New Hampshire. weeks.  If left untreated – within a few weeks to 
 months after the rash onset – complications such 
Who gets this disease? as meningitis and heart abnormalities may occur 
The bacterium that causes Lyme disease is and other body systems may be affected.  
transmitted within the natural cycle of the deer Swelling and pain in the large joints may recur 
tick, which feed on animals such as mice, over many months or years. 
opossums, dogs and deer.  Certain stages of the  
tick – especially the nymph and adult – can feed How soon do symptoms appear? 
on a human; if the tick is infected with the Symptoms usually begin within a month of a tick 
bacteria it can cause infection in people.  Cases of bite, generally 3-32 days. 
Lyme disease have also been reported in domestic  
animals.  There is no evidence that Lyme disease What is the treatment? 
is transmitted from person to person.  For Current therapy includes the use of antibiotics.  
example, a person cannot get infected from Early diagnosis improves the outcome of 
touching, kissing, or having sex with a person treatment. 
who has Lyme disease.  Lyme disease acquired  
during pregnancy may lead to infection of the 
placenta and possible stillbirth.  However, no How can the spread of this disease be 
negative effects on the fetus have been found prevented? 
when the mother receives appropriate antibiotic Special precautions to prevent exposure to ticks 
treatment.  There are no reports of Lyme disease should be used.  Apply insect repellent containing 
transmission from breast milk.   greater than 20% DEET, on clothes and exposed 
 skin.  Clothes (especially pants, socks, and shoes) 
People who spend time in wooded or grassy areas, may be treated with permethrin, which kills ticks 
including areas around the home, are at greater on contact.  Permethrin can also be used on tents 
risk of Lyme disease.  Although persons of all and some camping gear.  Do not use permethrin 
ages and gender are susceptible to Lyme disease, directly on skin.  Always follow the 
it is most common among children aged 5-9 and manufacturer’s instructions when applying any 
adults aged 55-59.  Most cases of Lyme disease repellents.  Long pants and long sleeves help keep 
occur between April and October. Current data ticks off skin.  Pant legs may be tucked into socks 
indicates that it is possible for someone to get or boots and shirt into pants to keep ticks on the 
Lyme disease more than once. outside of clothing.  After being outdoors, wash 
 and dry clothing at a high temperature to kill any 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



LYME DISEASE (cont.) 

ticks that may remain on clothing.  Perform tick 
checks after being outdoors.  Early removal of 
ticks can reduce the risk of infection. If a tick is 
attached to the skin for less than 24 hours, the 
chance of getting Lyme disease is extremely 
small.  Landscaping to reduce tick habitats and 
prevent deer and rodents around the home may be 
helpful. 
 
How should a tick be removed? 
To remove an attached tick, grasp it with one of 
the tick-removal tools found in stores or fine-
tipped tweezers as close as possible to the 
attachment site (i.e., skin) and pull upward and 
out with a firm and steady pressure. 
 
Do not handle the tick with bare hands, if using 
your fingers to remove a tick be sure to use a 
disposable towel when removing the tick.  Be 
careful not to squeeze, crush, or puncture the body 
of the tick, which may contain infectious fluids.  
After removing the tick, thoroughly cleanse the 
area with an antiseptic.  Seek medical attention if 
there is a concern about incomplete tick removal. 
 
Do not attempt to remove ticks by using Vaseline, 
lit cigarettes, or other home remedies; doing so 
may actually increase the chances of contracting a 
tick-borne disease. 
 
Who should be excluded? 
Exclusion is not necessary since the disease is not 
spread from person-to-person. 
 
Reportable? 
Yes.  Lyme disease is reportable by New 
Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 
(603) 271-4496. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



MEASLES (cont.) 

MEASLES 
 
 

Measles (aka, rubeola, red measles or hard What are the symptoms? 
measles) is a very communicable viral illness that The first signs and symptoms of measles – which 
can be prevented by immunization.  Usually it appear approximately 10-days after exposure – 
causes a rash, high fever, cough, runny nose and are similar to the common cold: cough, runny 
watery eyes.  The disease lasts one to two weeks.  nose, fever greater that can reach as high as 103-
Measles may be complicated by an ear infection 105 degrees Fahrenheit, and red and watery eyes.  
or pneumonia.  One out of every 1,000 children After these cold-like symptoms a rash develops, 
who gets measles develops an inflammation of the typically beginning on the face and then spreading 
brain (i.e., encephalitis).  Encephalitis can lead to downward over the entire body.  This rash lasts 4-
convulsions, deafness or mental retardation.  10 days. Infected persons may also experience 
Approximately one child in every 10,000 who loss of appetite or diarrhea.  
gets measles dies from it.  
 Infected persons are contagious from the 
Who gets this disease? appearance of the first cold symptom to four days 
Measles cases are generally limited to three after the appearance of the rash.  A small 
groups: 1) children less than 15 months of age percentage of immunized children may become 
(who are too young to have been immunized), 2) infected if their bodies fail to respond adequately 
those over 15 months of age but remain to the vaccine. 
unvaccinated and 3) adolescents and young adults  
who may have received an earlier ineffective How can the spread of this disease be 
measles vaccine prior to 1968 OR graduated from prevented? 
school prior to the mandatory measles vaccination The Advisory Committee on Immunization 
law OR who have received only one dose of live Practices (ACIP) recommends that children be 
virus measles vaccine.  Adults born prior to 1957 immunized against measles between 12 to 15 
are generally considered to be immune against months of age.  Children who are immunized 
measles. before 12 months of age need to be re-immunized. 
  
How is it spread? Children 15 months and older are required to 
Susceptible individuals spread measles by large have one dose of measles vaccine for daycare and 
infectious droplets or direct contact with the nasal school admittance.  A second dose of measles 
or throat secretions of infected persons.  Inhaling vaccine is required between 4-6 years of age. 
air that has tiny infectious droplets from sneezes  
and coughs also can spread it.  Measles is one of Who should be excluded? 
the most readily transmissible communicable Children and staff with measles shall be excluded 
diseases.  The communicable period is greatest from the school or work for at least four days after 
prior to or just after rash onset. the appearance of the rash. If children are 

unimmunized for medical, religious or other 
reasons they should be excluded for at least 2 
weeks after the onset of the rash in the last case of 
measles reported in the child care setting. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



MEASLES (cont.) 

Reportable? 
Yes.  Measles is reportable immediately by New 
Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease and 
Control at (603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



MENINGOCOCCAL ILLNESS 
 

Meningococcal Illnesses are caused by a People can carry the germs, without knowing it, in 
bacterium called Neisseria meningitidis (N. their noses, mouths or throats without ever getting 
meningitidis) and are serious, sometimes fatal sick themselves.  This is called “carrying” the 
illnesses.  The most common illness is meningitis, germ or being a “carrier”.  The germs can be 
an infection of the coverings of the brain.  spread from carriers to other people who may then 
Meningitis caused by N. meningitidis must be develop a meningococcal illness.  Obviously, sick 
treated immediately with hospitalization and IV people can also pass the germs on. 
(intravenous) antibiotics.  The disease usually  
starts suddenly with fever, chills, and lethargy The time from exposure to illness can be from 2-
(i.e., a feeling of tiredness) and a rash with fine 10 days, but it is usually one to four days.  After 
red “freckles” or purple splotches.  With one infection has occurred in a facility, there will 
meningitis, older children and adults may be more than the usual number of people carrying 
complain of severe headache, neck pain and neck the germ, so the risk of spread and serious disease 
stiffness.  In younger children, unusual irritability, becomes greater. 
poor appetite, excessive and high-pitched crying,  
vomiting and fever may be seen. How is it diagnosed and treated? 
 Meningococcal infections are diagnosed by signs 
Who gets this disease? and symptoms and by examining a sample of 
Meningococcal illnesses affect children less than blood and/or spinal fluid for white blood cells and 
5 years primarily affecting infants less than 24 bacteria.  Spinal fluid is obtained by a physician, 
months.  It peaks again in adolescents 16-21 years who performs a lumbar puncture (i.e., spinal tap). 
of age.  There is a high incidence N. meningitidis  
with people living in crowded living conditions People with these infections almost always 
such as barracks and institutions.  Freshman require hospitalization and are treated with 
college students living in dormitories have a antibiotics for 5-7 days. 
higher incidence than other college students not  
living in dorms.  This illness can affect any age How can the spread of this disease be 
group. prevented? 
 1. Meningititis Conjugate Vaccine is 
How is it spread? recommended for all children 11-12 years 
The bacterium is passed from person to person of age.  It is also recommended for all 
when they are in very close contact.  It is spread children 13-18 years of age who have not 
through infectious droplets of respiratory tract been previously vaccinated.  Unvaccinated 
secretions (e.g., sneezing, coughing, nasal college freshmen living in a dormitory 
discharge, saliva).  It can also be passed if people should be vaccinated. 
touch infected secretions then put their hands in 2. Meningitis Quadrivalent vaccine is 
their noses, eyes or mouths.  However, the available for children 2 years old and 
bacteria cannot live on environmental surfaces – older. 
they quickly shrivel and die. 3. If a person develops a meningococcal 

illness in a childcare center, all parents and 
staff must be notified immediately. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 
 



MENINGOCOCCAL ILLNESS (cont.) 

4. If a person develops a meningococcal 
illness, close contacts of this patient 
(including family members and person 
having intimate contact such as sleeping 
together, hugging and kissing) are at 
increased risk of developing the illness.  In 
this situation, a physician or public health 
professional may recommend: 1) watching 
for early symptoms of meningococcal 
illness, and/or 2) taking a preventive 
antibiotic to eliminate the bacteria from 
the body before disease begins. 

5. Any child or adult who is a close contact 
and who develops symptoms such as fever 
or headache require prompt evaluation by 
a healthcare provider regardless of 
whether or not this person has taken the 
preventive antibiotic. 

6. Monitor the situation closely for two to 
three weeks.  Make sure all ill children are 
seen by their doctors and that you are 
notified if another person develops 
meningococcal disease. 

7. Notify parents or guardians about the 
occurrence of this illness and urge them to 
contact their healthcare provider for 
specific medical advice. 

8. Childcare centers should contact the NH 
Department of Health & Human Services, 
Bureau of Infectious Disease and Control 
for recommendations about preventing 
spread of this illness and for assistance in 
implementing them. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Children with meningococcal disease are too ill to 
attend childcare.   
 
Reportable? 
Yes.  Meningococcal illnesses are reportable by 
New Hampshire law to the NH Department of 
Health & Human Services, Bureau of Infectious 
Disease and Control at (603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



MRSA SKIN INFECTIONS 
 
A frequent cause of skin infections is a bacteria properly; wash your hands with soap and water.  
called Staphylococcus aureus (Staph).  Most of Do not share personal items with other persons. 
these skin infections are minor.  However, staph  
bacteria can also cause more serious infections What should I do if I think I have a skin 
such as pneumonia and bloodstream infections.  
Some staph bacteria are resistant to certain infection? 
antibiotics and are known as MRSA (methicillin- Consult your healthcare provider as soon as 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus). possible if you think you have a skin infection.  
 Early treatment can help you prevent the infection 
What is a MRSA skin infection? from getting worse.  Be sure to follow directions 

from your doctor or healthcare provider closely, 
A MRSA skin infection can be a pimple, rash, even when you start to feel better.  Not taking all 
boil, or an open wound.  MRSA is often of your antibiotics leads to stronger, antibiotic-
misdiagnosed as spider bites.  MRSA bacteria are resistant bacteria. 
commonly found on the skin of healthy persons.   
MRSA infections often begin with an injury to the 
skin.  Symptoms of MRSA infection include If my healthcare provider told me that I 
redness, warmth, swelling, tenderness of the skin, have a MRSA skin infection, how do I 
and boils or blisters.  Sometimes it does not cause keep others from getting infected? 
any problems; sometimes it causes minor • Keep the infected area covered with clean, 
infections, such as pimples or boils.  If left dry bandages.  Pus from infected wounds 
untreated, it can cause serious infections. is very infectious. 
 • Wash your hands frequently with soap and 
How do MRSA skin infections spread? warm water, especially after changing 
MRSA lives on skin and survives on objects for your bandages or touching the infected 
24 hours or more.  MRSA can rub off on the skin skin. 
of an infected person onto the skin of another • Regularly clean your bathroom, kitchen, 
person during rigorous skin-to-skin contact.  Or, and all other rooms, as well as your 
the MRSA bacteria can come off of the infected personal items.  Wash clothes and other 
skin of a person onto a shared object, and get onto items that become soiled with hot water or 
the skin of the next person who uses it.  Examples bleach, when possible. 
of commonly shared objects include towels, soap, • Drying clothes in a hot dryer, rather than 
razors and athletic equipment. air-drying them also helps to kill bacteria 
 in clothes. 
How can I prevent myself or my family • Tell any healthcare provider that treats you 
members from getting infected? during the infection that you have an 
Wash your hands with soap and warm water.  MRSA skin infection. 
Keep cuts and scrapes clean with soap and water.   
Avoid skin contact and sharing personal items Reportable? 
with anyone you suspect could have a MRSA skin No.  MRSA is not reportable by New Hampshire 
infection.  When using protective gloves to treat law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
the infected area, remove and dispose of them Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  However, 

Public Health Professionals are available for 
consultation at 603-271-4496.   

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 
 



MRSA SKIN INFECTION (cont.) 

For further information, refer to the Centers for 
Disease Control & Prevention website at 
www.cdc.gov  or the NH Department of Health & 
Human Services website at www.dhhs.nh.gov . 
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



MUMPS 
 

Mumps is a viral illness that usually causes How can the spread of this disease be 
swelling and tenderness of the salivary glands, prevented? 
particularly the gland at the angle of the jaw.  The national Advisory Committee on 
Headache, slight fever and earache are common.  Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends that 
Possible complications include Meningitis (an children be immunized against mumps.  This is 
inflammation of the coverings of the brain and frequently combined with measles and rubella 
spinal cord), Encephalitis (an inflammation of the vaccine, which is required for childcare and 
brain), deafness and, particularly in adolescent or school attendance. Children should receive this 
adult males, inflammation of the testicles. Mumps vaccine between 12-15 months of age and again 
during pregnancy can result is loss of the fetus. between 4-6 years of age.  
  
Who gets this disease? Who should be excluded? 
Mumps may be seen in unimmunized children, or A child or staff member with mumps should not 
adolescents and young adults who graduated from return until five days after the onset of swelling.  
school prior to laws requiring mumps Any susceptible, unvaccinated child or staff 
immunization.  Most adults born before 1957 member at a childcare center shall not return to 
have been infected by exposure to the disease and the center until 26 days after onset of parotid 
are probably immune. gland inflammation in the last person with mumps 
 in the center.  Any person so excluded may return 
How is it spread? to the center immediately if he/she receives 
The mumps virus is found most often in saliva.  It mumps vaccine. 
is transmitted by direct contact or by droplet  
spread of the virus in the air through sneezes and Reportable? 
coughs.  Mumps is most infectious 48 hours prior Yes.  Mumps is reportable by New Hampshire 
to the onset of symptoms. law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
 Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 
What are the symptoms? 271-4496. 
The most common symptoms are: 1) fever with 
headache and earache, loss of appetite and 2) 
swollen glands in front of and below the ear. 
 
Symptoms appear 12-25 days after exposure.  
Infected persons are contagious from 1-2 days 
before to 5 days after swelling begins.  A small 
percentage of immunized children may be 
infected with mumps if their bodies fail to 
respond adequately to the vaccine. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



NOROVIRUS (cont.) 

NOROVIRUS 
 

What is Norovirus?  
Noroviruses are a group of viruses that cause the How soon after exposure do symptoms 
“stomach flu”, or gastrointestinal (stomach or appear? 
digestive) illness.  Norovirus infection occurs Symptoms of Norovirus illness usually begin 
occasionally in only one or a few people or it can about 24 –48 hours after ingestion of the virus. 
be responsible for large outbreaks, such as in  
long-term care facilities. 
 How is Norovirus infection diagnosed? 
Who gets Norovirus? Laboratory diagnosis can be performed in the 

 New Hampshire Public Health Laboratories when 
Norovirus infects people of all ages worldwide there are multiple cases.  Diagnosis is often based 
and anyone can become infected.  There are many on the combination of symptoms and the short 
different strains of norovirus, which makes it time of the illness. 
difficult for a person’s body to develop long  
lasting immunity.  Therefore, Norovirus illness 
can reoccur through a person’s lifetime.  In What is the treatment for Norovirus 
addition, because of differences in genetic factors, infection? 
some people are more likely to become infected No specific treatment is available.  People who 
and develop more severe illness than others. become dehydrated might need to be rehydrated 
 by taking liquids by mouth.  Occasionally, a 
How does someone get Norovirus? patient may need to be hospitalized to receive 
Norovirus is spread from person to person via intravenous fluids. 
fecal-oral route, but can also be spread through  
the air during vomiting.  Good hand washing is How can Norovirus be prevented? 
the most important way to prevent the While there is no vaccine for Norovirus, there are 
transmission of Norovirus.  Outbreaks have been precautions people should take: 
linked to sick food handlers, ill healthcare  Wash hands with soap and warm water 
workers, cases in facilities such as nursing homes after using the bathroom and changing 
spreading to other residents, contaminated diapers 
shellfish, raw or unpasteurized milk, and water  Wash hands with soap and warm water 
contaminated with sewage. before preparing or eating any food 
  Cook all shellfish thoroughly before eating 
What are the symptoms of Norovirus?  Wash raw vegetables before eating 
The most common symptoms include nausea,  Dispose of sewage in a sanitary manner 
vomiting, watery diarrhea, and stomach cramps.   
Fever is usually low grade or absent.  Infected Who should be excluded? 
people generally recover in 24-60 hours and Food handlers, healthcare workers and childcare 
serious illness rarely occurs.   workers should be excluded for 48 hours after 
 resolution of symptoms.  Children with non-
 specific diarrhea should be excluded until 
 symptoms resolve. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



NOROVIRUS (cont.) 

Reportable? 
No. Norovirus is not reportable by New 
Hampshire state law to the Division of Public 
Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
Control.  However, Public Health Professionals 
are available for consultation at (603) 271-4496. 
For further information, refer to the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention website at: 
 https://www.cdc.gov/  
Or the NH Department of Health & Human 
Services website at: 
 https://www.dhhs.nh.gov/  
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



ORAL HERPES (aka, Cold Sores) 
 

Oral herpes – which is also referred to as cold How can the spread of this disease be 
sores – is caused by a virus call herpes simplex prevented? 
type 1.  This infection is commonly acquired for 1. Frequent hand washing. 
the first time in early childhood and may reappear 2. Caregivers should wear gloves when 
throughout a person’s lifetime. contact with sores is necessary (e.g., when 
 applying medication). 
Who gets this disease? 3. Clean and disinfect mouthed toys daily or 
Anyone can get oral herpes. when soiled. 
 4. Do not kiss an infected person when 
How is it spread? lesions are present. 
Oral herpes is spread through close person-to-  
person contact such as direct contact with saliva Who should be excluded? 
or the sores (e.g., kissing). No exclusion is necessary for mild oral herpes 
 in children who are in control of their mouth 
What are the symptoms? secretions.  Exclude children who do not have 
There are initial infections and in some people control of oral secretions when active sores 
recurrent sores (fluid-like blisters).  In young are present inside the mouth. 
children the initial infections may not cause any  
symptoms or can involve many sores within the Reportable? 
mouth, on the cheeks, lips and/or gums.  The No.  Oral herpes is not reportable by New 
sores will crust and heal within a few days.  If the Hampshire law to the Division of Public 
sores within the mouth are extensive, children can Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
run a fever and refuse to drink or eat. and Control.  However, Public Health 
 Professionals are available for consultation at 
How soon do the symptoms appear? (603) 271-4496. 
In initial infections, it takes from 2 to 14 days 
from the time a person is exposed until the sores 
become apparent.  Recurrent sores occur in 
individuals when the virus becomes active after 
being dormant. 
 
What is the treatment? 
Most cold sores heal in 3-4 days without 
treatment.  There are ointments and medications 
available that may shorten the healing time but 
there is no cure for oral herpes.  It is best to check 
with your physician to see if treatment is 
indicated. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



PEDICULOSIS CAPITIS (Head Lice) CONT. 

PEDICULOSIS CAPITIS (Head Lice) 
 
Head lice are tiny insects that live only on most often made by finding nits within a ¼-inch 
people’s scalps and hair.  The adults hatch from of the scalp.  Nits are tiny, plump, pearl gray 
small eggs, called nits, which are attached to the colored; oval-shaped specks attached to the hair 
individual hairs near the scalp.  Nits may be found and cannot be easily moved up or down the hair 
throughout the hair, but are most often located at (as could specks of dandruff).  It helps to use a 
the back of the scalp, behind the ears and the top magnifying glass and natural light when searching 
of the head.  The eggs hatch in 10-14 days, with for them.  The best places to look are the hair on 
new lice reaching adulthood in about 10 days.  the back of the neck, behind the ears and the top 
The female louse can live for 21-30 days, and lays of the head.  Hatched eggs can be found further 
about six to eight eggs a day.  The lice live by out on the hair shaft and are snow-white and 
biting and sucking blood from the scalp. conspicuous. 
  
The major symptom of head lice is itching caused Treatment is directed at getting rid of the lice 
by the bite of the louse.  Persistent scratching of from both the infested person and his/her 
the head and back of the neck should be viewed surrounding and personal items.  All household 
with suspicion.  Often red bite marks and scratch members and persons with close physical contact 
marks can be seen on the scalp and neck and a with the infested person should be examined for 
secondary bacterial infection causes discharge and lice and treated if infested (live lice are seen).  
crusting.  Swollen neck glands can also occur Some healthcare providers may simultaneously 
related to an infection from scratching. treat all members of a household. 
  
Who gets this disease? Treating the infested person. 
Contrary to popular belief, head lice are not a sign Consult a physician before treating:  (1) infants, 
of unclean people or homes.  They can occur at (2) pregnant or nursing women, or (3) anyone 
any age and to either sex.  Anyone who has close with extensive cuts or scratches on the head or 
contact with an infected person or shares personal neck.  For others, there are several medicines 
items can become infested. available to kill head lice.  They are used like 
 shampoo.  Many head lice medications are 
How is it spread? available at your local drug store without 
Lice do not jump or fly.  They cannot be caught prescription and some products are available by 
from grass, trees, or animals.  They are spread prescription.  All of these products must be used 
only by crawling from person-to-person directly carefully and according to direction. 
or onto shared personal items, such as combs,  
brushes, head coverings, clothing, bedding and There are several over-the-counter (OTC) name 
towels.  Frequent bathing or shampooing will not brand products which include A-2000 Pronto, 
prevent lice or eliminate them once they are R&C, Rid and Triple X that all contain the active 
established. ingredient Pyrethrins.  Pyrethrins are natural 
 extracts from the chrysanthemum flower.  Though 
How is it diagnosed and treated? safe and effective, pyrethrins only kill crawling 
Lice are less than 1/8-inch long and are usually lice, not unhatched nits.  A second treatment is 
light brown in color.  They avoid light, which recommended in 7-10 days to kill any newly 
makes it difficult to see them.  The diagnosis is hatched lice.  Treatment failures are common. 

 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



PEDICULOSIS CAPITIS (Head Lice) cont. 

Nix is another commonly available OTC 2. Non-washable (e.g., furry toys, pillows) 
medication that contains the active ingredient can be put in a HOT dryer for 20-minutes 
Permethrin.  Permethrin is safe and effective and or dry-cleaned. 
may continue to kill newly hatched lice for 3. Things that cannot be washed, dried, or 
several days after treatment.  A second treatment dry-cleaned can be sealed in a plastic bag 
may be necessary in 7-10 days to kill any newly for two weeks, the duration of the life 
hatched lice that may have hatched after residual cycle of the louse. 
medication from the first treatment was no longer 4. Soak combs and brushes for 1 hour in 
active.  Treatment failures are common. rubbing alcohol, Lysol™, or wash with 
 soap and hot (130  F) water. 
Prescription medications used to treat head lice 5. Vacuum the floor and furniture.  The risk 
include Lindane (Kwell) and Malathion (Ovide).  of getting re-infested from a louse that has 
Consult with your healthcare provider on the fallen onto the carpet or sofa is very small. 
proper use of these prescription medications.  For 6. Insecticide sprays are not recommended 
these medications, retreats in 7-10 days ONLY if and can be harmful to people and animals. 
crawling bugs are found.  
 How can the spread of this disease be 
Although these products will kill lice, none will prevented? 
kill 100% of the nits.  Nit removal after 1. General cleanliness at the center, as 
shampooing may be time-consuming and difficult previously outlined, should be practiced. 
due to their firm attachment to the hair.  A 2. Children should not share personal items 
solution of vinegar and water may help make such as clothing, brushes, combs, hats, etc. 
removal easier.  Special, fine-tooth combs can be 3. Each child should have his/her own crib 
used to aid in nit removal.  Most treatment mat and should not switch. 
requires retreatment in 7-10 days.  A daily nit 4. Children’s personal belongings should be 
check for the next ten days is advisable.  If there stored separately. 
is evidence of new nits (less than ¼-inch from the 5. Caregivers should learn to recognize nits 
scalp) or newly hatched lice, it may be necessary and should help regularly check children’s 
to repeat treatment.  (NOTE:  Unless reinfection hair when there is a known case of head 
occurs, more than two treatments are unnecessary lice in the center. 
and can be dangerous). 6. If a case is identified, the center should 
 follow cleaning procedures outlined 
Treating the surroundings/personal above. 
items in the childcare center.  
Head lice can only survive 24-48 hours if they fall Who should be excluded? 
off a person and cannot feed.  You don’t need to Routine exclusion of school-aged children with 
spend a lot of time or money on cleaning head lice is not recommended.  The child’s 
activities.  Follow these steps to help avoid re- parents or guardian should be notified when head 
infestation by lice that have recently fallen off the lice is identified by a care provider or teacher.  
hair or crawled onto clothing or furniture. The child’s parent or guardian should be 

1. Machine-wash in HOT water all washable telephoned/emailed or a note sent home with the 
items belonging to the daycare facility that child at the end of the school day stating that 
may contain lice. prompt, proper treatment of this condition is in 

the best interest of the child and his/her 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



PEDICULOSIS CAPITIS (Head Lice) cont. 

classmates.  A child should be allowed to return 
to school after proper treatment even if nits are 
still present.  “No Nits Policies” are not effective 
and should be discouraged.  Mass screenings are 
also not recommended but close contacts should 
be checked ideally.   
 
Children in preschool or daycare settings who 
have visible live lice may need to be excluded 
only if direct head to head contact cannot be 
avoided. 
 
Reportable? 
No.  Pediculosis is not reportable by New 
Hampshire law.  However, the Bureau of 
Infectious Disease Control professionals are 
available for consultation at (603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



PERTUSSIS (Whooping Cough) 
 
 

Pertussis is a very contagious bacterial infection of What if a child is exposed to pertussis? 
the respiratory tract.  Usually it causes a persistent 1. All close contacts younger than 7 years of 
cough that follows a normal cold.  The child has age who have not completed the four-dose 
episodes of violent coughing that end with the primary series should complete the series 
typical high-pitched Whoop, and occasionally with the minimum intervals. 
vomiting is seen.  Between bursts of coughing the 2. Close contacts who are 4-6 years of age 
child appears well. Coughing attacks may and who have not yet received the second 
continue to occur for 10-12 weeks.  Petussis is booster dose (usually the fifth dose of 
frequently complicated by pneumonia and ear DTaP) should be vaccinated. 
infections, particularly in infants.  Death from 3. Any close contact 11 years old and older 
pertussis is rare. can receive a single dose of Tdap if it has 
 been at least 2 years since the previous Td. 
Who gets this disease? 4. Your physician may recommend 
Petussis occurs in all age groups.  Untreated cases antibiotics for your child and all close 
in older children and adults can spread pertussis to contacts. 
infants and young children at home.  It is  
important that all infants and young children be up How can the spread of this disease be 
to date with pertussis vaccination.  The most prevented? 
serious disease and complications are seen in A combination vaccine of Diphtheria, Tetanus and 
infants and very young children. acellular Pertussis (DTaP) is required for both 
 childcare and school attendance.  The Advisory 
How is it spread? Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) 
The bacterium is spread by direct contact with recommends immunizing children against 
discharge from the nose or throat of an infected pertussis, along with diphtheria and tetanus, 
person, or by breathing in infected droplets in the beginning as early as six weeks of age.  The five 
air when an infected person coughs.  The period of dose series should be completed at 2 months, 4 
greatest risk of spread is during the early “cold” months, 6 months, and 15-18 months, and 4-6 
stage. years of age. If the child has a contraindication to 
 the pertussis vaccine, they would receive a vaccine 
What are the symptoms? called DT which does not contain the pertussis 
The disease begins with the cold like symptoms antigen. 
such as runny nose and watery eyes, and cough.   
The cough becomes more persistent.   Within 2 A single booster dose of Diphtheria, Tetanus, and 
weeks the cough occurs as bouts of uncontrollable acellular Pertussis (Tdap) is recommended for 
cough often with a “whoop” sound.  Vomiting adolescents 11-18 years of age who have 
often follows the cough.  The “whoop” sound may completed the recommended childhood 
be absent in older children and adults. DTP/DTaP vaccination series and have not 

received Tetanus and diptheria (Td) booster dose. 
Adults who are 18 and older should receive one 
dose of Tdap If they have received the Td booster 
an interval of at least 2 years between Td and 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 
 



PERTUSSIS (Whooping Cough) cont. 

Tdap is encouraged to reduce the risk for local and 
systemic reactions after Tdap vaccination.  The Td 
booster is recommended every 10 years thereafter 
to provide protection. 
 
Reportable? 
Yes.  Pertussis is reportable by New Hampshire 
law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-
4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 
 



PINWORMS (Enterobuius Vermicularis) 
 

Pinworms are tiny worms that live in the lower How can the spread of this disease be 
intestine of people.  Most often at night, female prevented? 
worms come out to the anus of an infected person 1. Wash hands thoroughly after using the 
and lay their microscopic eggs. toilet and after diapering children. 
 2. Children should be bathed in the morning 
Who gets this disease? so that any eggs laid at night can be 
Anyone can.  It is particularly common in removed.  
preschool and school-aged children and therefore 3. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
in daycare centers. food. 
 4. If you suspect a child has pinworms, based 
How is it spread? on symptoms, this child should see a 
Pinworm eggs can be transferred orally from the physician for the correct diagnosis and 
infected individual to another person.  The eggs treatment. 
can also be transferred indirectly through 5. Each child’s dirty clothing should be 
clothing, bedding, food and other contaminated stored separately in plastic bags and sent 
articles. home for laundering. 
 6. All bedding and clothing should be 
What are the symptoms? washed in HOT water. 
People may be without symptoms or they may 7. Every child should have his/her own crib 
have anal itching, feel irritable and/or have or mat and should not switch sheets with 
disturbed sleep. other children.  Mats should be kept clean. 
 8. Clean and vacuum play and sleeping areas 
How soon do the symptoms appear? daily for several days after diagnosis. 
Symptoms usually appear between two-weeks and  
two-months.  The life cycle requires two to six Who should be excluded? 
weeks to complete. Once the diagnosis of pinworms is made, the 
 child should be appropriately treated.  After the 
Can a person have this disease without treatment the child does not need to be kept out of 
knowing it? childcare. 
Yes.  Often, members of an infected child’s  
household are also unknowingly infected and, if Reportable? 
not treated, can reinfect a treated child and other No, pinworms are not reportable by New 
people. Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
 Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  
What is the treatment? However, Public Health Professionals are 
There are several medicines available to treat this available for consultation at (603) 271-4496.  
infection.  Often healthcare providers will treat 
the entire family if one member of the home is 
infected. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



POLIOMYELITIS (Polio) 
 

Poliomyelitis is caused by a virus.  Polio typically Reportable? 
produces weakening of the muscles, sometimes to Yes.  Poliomyelitis (polio) is reportable by New 
the point of requiring assistance to move about.  Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
The illness ranges widely in severity. Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 
 (603) 271-4496.  
Who gets this disease?  
Today, polio cases occur mainly among  
unimmunized young children or among members 
of groups that refuse immunization. 
 
How is it spread? 
The virus is spread by direct contact with infected 
stool and throat secretions.  Infected persons are 
most contagious during 7-10 days before and after 
onset of symptoms. 
 
What are the symptoms? 
The illness ranges in severity from a mild, 
unnoticed febrile illness to meningitis (an 
inflammation of the covering of the brain and 
spinal cord), to paralysis and even death. 
 
How can the spread of this disease be 
prevented? 
Two types of polio vaccine have been available: 
trivalent oral polio vaccine (TOPV) and 
inactivated polio vaccine (IPV).  The national 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP) recommends four doses of polio vaccine. 
The four dose series should be completed at 2 
months, 4 months, 6-18 months, and 4-6 years. 
The vaccine is required for both childcare and 
school attendance.  
 
Who should be excluded? 
Children and staff should be excluded during the 
acute phase of illness. 
 
 
 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



RABIES (cont.) 

RABIES 
 
Rabies is a viral disease that attacks the central person may be considered exposed to rabies even 
nervous system.  It can be transmitted to people in the absence of an obvious bite, including: 
through contact with the saliva or brain and spinal • If a person awakens to find a bat in their 
cord tissue of a rabid animal as described below.  room 
It is a fatal disease for humans but may be •          A bat is seen in the room of an unattended 
effectively prevented.  Rabies in certain animals, child, or 
especially wildlife, is common throughout New • A bat is seen in the room of a mentally 
Hampshire. impaired or intoxicated person. 
  
What are the signs of rabies in animals? People cannot get rabies from having contact with 
Animals may act friendly or become vicious.  bat guano (feces), blood or urine.  If an exposure 
Animals that are usually active only at night may is possible, and the bat is available, the local 
be found active during the day.  Animal behavior animal control authority should be contacted to 
may be unusually aggressive.  Animals infected aid in capturing the animal for testing. 
may seem withdrawn, hide in corners or refuse  
food.  The most important thing to remember is What are the symptoms of rabies in 
that a rabid animal will usually be infectious to humans? 
people or other animals for a varying period of Symptoms of rabies in people include 
time before a change in their appearance or apprehension, anxiety, headaches, fever, 
behavior. tiredness, paralysis, muscle spasm in the throat 
 leading to fear of water, delirium/hallucinations, 
Who gets this disease? convulsions, and, in almost all cases, death.  
People can get rabies through two types of Symptoms are progressive and without medical 
exposure:  bite exposure and non-bite exposure. intervention the usual duration is 2-6 days; death 
• Bite exposure:  Any penetration of the is often due to respiratory or cardiac failure. 
skin by the teeth of an infected animal.  All bites  
regardless of location, pose a potential risk for What is the treatment? 
rabies. If a person is bitten or has a non-bite exposure, 
• Non-bite exposure:  Infectious saliva, immediately wash the wound thoroughly with 
brain or spinal cord tissue from a rabid animal soap and water for several minutes.  (NOTE:  
comes into contact with the lining of a person’s flush an exposed eye, nose or mouth with water or 
eye, nose or mouth or with a cut, abrasion or other saline).  This is extremely important as it may 
pre-existing break in the person’s skin. prevent the rabies virus from entering the body 
 tissue and prevent infection.  Then, the person 
What about bats and rabies? should be seen immediately by a physician or go 
Bats are responsible for the majority of to an emergency department for examination and 
domestically acquired human cases of rabies.  any needed treatment.   
People usually know when a bat has bitten or  
otherwise exposed them to rabies.  However, If indicated, a series of shots should be given.  
because bats have small teeth that may not leave One of the shots (Human Rabies Immune 
obvious marks, there are certain situations when a Globulin) is injected around the site of the 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



RABIES (cont.) 

exposure to provide immediate protection while should be considered as possible exposure 
the rabies vaccine is given in the arm muscle.  A to rabies and must be evaluated medically. 
total of 5shots (4 shots of vaccine and one of 4. Keep trash containers tightly closed.  
Human Rabies Immune Globulin-may be more Garbage attracts animals like skunks and 
than one and is based on body weight) are given raccoons. 
over one month.  If an individual has had rabies 5. Vaccinate all dogs and cats against rabies 
vaccine in the past, this treatment will vary.  To and make sure their shots are kept up-to-
work best, these shots should be given as soon as date.   
possible after the exposure.  If the animal has 6. If another animal has injured a dog, cat or 
been caught and will be tested for rabies or other pet, handle it only with thick rubber 
quarantined for 10 days (dogs, cats, and ferrets gloves and have it examined by a 
only), treatment can usually be delayed until veterinarian right away.  Saliva from an 
results are available or quarantine is over.  attacking rabid animal remains infectious 
Contact the local animal control authority to aid in on the attacked pet’s fur until it has 
capturing the animal for confinement and thoroughly dried. 
observation or testing.  
 Reportable? 
Is there a cure? Yes.  Rabies in animals and humans is reportable 
There is no cure for rabies once the infected by New Hampshire law to the Division of Public 
person becomes ill with the disease.  Appropriate Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
rabies immunizations given before the onset of Control at (603) 271-4496.  
illness are effective in preventing the disease.  
People whose work or hobbies bring them 
frequently into contact with potentially rabid 
animals should have a series of three rabies 
vaccine shots before they are exposed.  They will 
then require only two vaccine shots after 
exposure. 
 
How can the spread of this disease be 
prevented? 

1. Do not handle wild animals.  Teach 
children to avoid wildlife, strays and all 
other animals they don’t know.  Call the 
New Hampshire Fish and Game 
Department at (603) 271-3361 to report 
dead, sick or injured animals. Call the 
local animal control officer for domestic 
animal exposures. 

2. If bitten by a wild or domestic animal, 
seek medical attention immediately and 
notify the local animal control officer. 

3. All bites by wild animals or contact with 
their saliva or brain or spinal cord tissue 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



Ringworm (Tinea) 
 

Tinea, more commonly called ringworm is a skin How can the spread of this disease be 
infection caused by a fungus that lives on the skin, prevented? 
surfaces of items, or household items – like 1. Items frequently touched by children (i.e. 
bedding, clothing, or toys. Ringworm can affect toys and surfaces) should be washed or 
any part of the body including the scalp.   wiped down frequently. This can be done 
 with a diluted bleach solution.  
Who get this disease? 2. Children should not be allowed to walk 
Anyone can get the disease. It is transmitted barefoot 
through direct contact with the fungus including 3. Do not allow children to share personal 
touching another person or surface containing the items like brushes or combs.  
fungus. Ringworm can also be transmitted by 4. Children should wash their hands with 
contact with animals (e.g. cats and dogs).  soap and warm water after touching any 
 animals  
What are the symptoms? 5. Socks should be changed daily or if they 
Ringworm affecting the skin causes a red, circular become wet for any reason.  
patch to form. The patch usually has a raised 6. While under treatment swimming pools 
edge. Ringworm between the toes, or more should be avoided. 
commonly called athlete’s foot, causes the skin  
between the toes to appear cracked and peeling. Who should be excluded? 
Ringworm of the scalp can cause redness of the The child’s parent or guardian should be 
scalp or loss of hair.   telephoned/emailed or a note sent home at the end 
 of the school day stating that the child needs to be 
Symptoms typically appear between 4-14 days seen by his/her health care provider related to the 
after contact with the fungus.  potential for infection.  
  
 The child should be excluded until treatment is 
How is it diagnosed and treated? started.  
A diagnosis of ringworm is made by a healthcare  
provider based on the clinical features of the skin. Reportable? 
The healthcare provider may feel necessary to No, ringworm is not reportable by New 
take a scraping of the skin for a culture.  Hampshire law.  However, the Bureau of 
 Infectious Disease Control professionals are 
Ringworm of the skin can be treated with an over- available for consultation at (603) 271-4496.  
the-counter antifungal cream or lotion. Ringworm 
of the scalp can only be treated with a prescribed 
antifungal medication from the child’s health care 
provider. 
 
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



ROSEOLA (Exanthema Subitum) 
 

Roseola is the most common viral rash illness that The healthcare provider may recommend 
occurs in young children.  It is sometimes referred supportive treatment of symptoms but there is no 
to as Sixth Disease or, less commonly, “baby treatment that is specific for roseola. 
measles”.  Roseola is caused by a virus called  
human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) and, possibly, How can the spread of this disease be 
human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7). 
 prevented? 
Who gets this disease? There is no vaccine to prevent this disease, but 

 good hand washing can help prevent the spread.   
Roseola usually occurs in children aged 6 months  
to 2 years of age.  It is uncommon for the disease 
to occur in children under the age of 3 months or Who should be excluded? 
over the age of 4 years.  There is no known risk to Generally, a child with a rash and fever should be 
pregnant women.  Cases are not seasonal and excluded from childcare until seen by a healthcare 
usually occur throughout the year. provider.  A child with a rash and no fever may 
 return to childcare.  There are no 
How is Roseola spread? recommendations for preventive therapy for other 

 children attending the childcare or for childcare 
Humans are the only known source for roseola.  It personnel. 
is not known how the disease is spread or what  
the infectious period is.  It is not considered to be 
very infectious. Reportable? 
 No.  Roseola is not reportable by New Hampshire 
How soon do symptoms appear? state law to the Division of Public Health 

 Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  
Symptoms usually begin 4-10 days after However, Public Health Professionals are 
exposure. available for consultation at (603) 271-4496.  
 
What are the symptoms? 
Roseola usually begins with a high fever that lasts 
3 to 5 days followed by a rash that lasts 1-2 days.  
When the fever disappears, a rash appears, usually 
on the face and body.  Irritability, runny nose, 
eyelid swelling and tiredness are sometimes 
present during the time of the fever.  Most 
children, however, are alert and playful during 
this time. 
 
How is it diagnosed and treated? 
While Roseola can be diagnosed through 
laboratory conformation, a healthcare provider 
typically diagnoses the disease based on the 
symptoms.  A rash occurring immediately after 
the fever breaks is characteristic of the disease.  
 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



Rotavirus 
Rotavirus is a virus that causes diarrhea and How can the spread of the disease 
vomiting. It is the most common cause of be prevented? 
diarrhea in children under two years old.  1. Good handwashing especially before

preparing meals and after diapering a
What are the symptoms? child.
Rotavirus typically causes non-bloody 2. Clean all meal preparation surfaces
diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting.  and surfaces children touch

frequently.
The symptoms usually last 3-8 days but the 3. Clean children’s toys frequently – a
virus can be present before diarrhea begins diluted bleach mixture can be used to
and last up to three weeks after symptoms clean and sanitize items or surfaces.
disappear.  

The Advisory Committee on Immunization 
How is the disease spread? Practices (ACIP), recommends routine 
Rotavirus is spread by direct contact (fecal- vaccination of children against Rotavirus. 
oral route) with contaminated food or Two vaccines are available to prevent the 
objects (i.e. toys or surfaces frequently spread of Rotavirus. Rotateq is a 3 dose 
touched by children).  series and is recommended to be given at 2 

months, 4 months, and 6 months. Rotarix is 
How is it diagnosed and treated? a 2 dose series recommended to be given at 
Your child’s healthcare provider may make 2 months and 4 months.  
a diagnosis of rotavirus based on your 
child’s symptoms. While not typically done, Who should be excluded? 
a stool sample may be collected and Children should be excluded from childcare 
analyzed to confirm diagnosis.  if they are experiencing more than 2 loose 

stools per day or diarrhea cannot be 
There is no treatment for Rotavirus. The contained in diapers as it impedes the 
virus is self-limiting. Your child may need caregiver’s ability to care for other children 
extra fluids in order to prevent dehydration. in a safe and sanitary manner.  
If you notice a decrease in your child’s urine 
output or if your child cries with few or no Reportable? 
tears, had a dry mouth, is unusually sleepy No, rotavirus is not reportable by New 
or fussy contact your child’s healthcare Hampshire law.  However, the Bureau of 
provider.  Infectious Disease Control professionals 

are available for consultation at (603) 
271-4496. 

Division of Public Health Services Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control REVISED –January 2018 



RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS 
INFECTION (RSV) 

 
RSV is an infection of the small air passages of • Avoid sharing cups and eating utensils with 
the lung causing bronchiolitis and pneumonia.  others, 
RSV is most common in children under 1 year of • Refrain from kissing others, 
age but it can affect anyone at any age.  Most • Cleaning contaminated surfaces frequently 
children have been infected with RSV by the time (i.e., door knobs, toys, etc.) 
they turn 2 years of age, but only a few will  
develop serious illness.  Re-infection can occur Should the child with RSV be excluded? 
throughout life. Children with fever and respiratory symptoms 
 should be excluded from childcare until they no 
What are the symptoms of RSV? longer have a fever.  Children with respiratory 
Small infants may have irritability, decreased symptoms should be kept separated from children 
activity and breathing difficulties as early with high-risk conditions. 
symptoms.  Older children may have symptoms  
similar to any other respiratory infection, such as Is RSV Reportable? 
cough, sneezing, fever, runny nose, wheezing, and No. RSV is not reportable by New Hampshire 
decrease in appetite. state law to the Division of Public Health 
 Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control; 
How is RSV spread? Public Health Professionals are available for 
RSV is spread when the infected person sneezes consultation at (603) 271-4496.  
or coughs the droplets into the air.  The person 
who is at risk then inhales the virus from the air.  
The infection can be spread by direct contact with 
nasal or oral secretions from the infected person.  
Activities such as kissing the face of a child or 
coming into contact with surfaces that have been 
infected with secretions and then rubbing the eyes 
or nose can spread RSV.  RSV is common in 
winter and early spring. 
 
What is the incubation period for RSV? 
The incubation period can range from 2 - 8 days 
but is usually 4 - 6 days. 
 
How can RSV be prevented? 
Steps can be taken to limit exposure and to help 
stop the spread of RSV infection: 
• Cover coughs and sneezes, 
• Wash hands frequently and correctly, 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



RUBELLA (GERMAN MEASLES) 
 

Rubella is a childhood viral disease, which causes How can the spread of this disease be 
a rash, low-grade fever and swollen glands in the prevented? 
area behind the ears.  Some children may have a The national Advisory Committee on 
very mild illness with no rash at all.  However, if Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends that 
a pregnant woman without protection against children be immunized against rubella after 12-
rubella is exposed to the disease, there could be months of age.  The two dose vaccine should be 
harmful effects to her baby.  Pregnant women completed at 12-15 months of age and 4-6 years. 
should consult their physician at once if they This immunization is required for both childcare 
have been exposed to rubella! and school attendance. The vaccine is usually 
 combined with measles and mumps vaccine.   
Who gets this disease? Who should be excluded? 
Some young adults remain susceptible to rubella A child or staff member with rubella or suspect 
due to high school graduation prior to the school rubella should not return to daycare until seven 
rubella vaccination laws.  Rubella is most often days after the onset of the rash. 
seen in unimmunized children and in this  
susceptible adolescent and young adult group. 
 Reportable? 
How is it spread? Yes.  Rubella is reportable immediately by New 

 Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
The virus is spread by large droplets spread Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 
through the air from sneezing or coughing, or by (603) 271-4496.  
direct contact with infected nasal or saliva 
secretions.  
 
What are the symptoms? 

1. A two to three day rash that begins on the 
face and quickly spreads downward over 
the entire body. 

2. A low-grade fever of 101-degrees 
Fahrenheit or less. 

3. Swollen glands behind the ears. (NOTE: 
this may appear before the rash). Joint and 
body pain is most commonly experienced 
in adults. 

4. Symptoms appear 12-23 days after 
exposure; usually 16-18. 

 
Infected persons are contagious from one week 
before to 5-7 days after the appearance of the 
rash.  A small percentage of properly immunized 
children may be infected with rubella due to 
occasional vaccine failure. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SALMONELLOSIS (cont.) 

SALMONELLOSIS 
 

 
Salmonella is an illness caused by the bacterium Can a person have this disease and not 
Salmonella of which there are numerous types.  know it? 
Salmonellosis most commonly causes intestinal Yes.  Some people may not have symptoms 
illness but occasionally may infect the blood serious enough to cause them to seek medical 
stream.  The bacterium is passed in the stool of attention.  In some cases of Salmonella infection, 
infected individuals. after the diarrhea illness is over the organism may 
 be excreted in the stool for months to over a year.  
Who gets this disease? This is called the carrier state. 
Any person can become infected with Salmonella.   
The disease is more likely to cause a severe What is the treatment? 
infection in the very young, the very old and in Although most people with Salmonellosis will 
people with underlying diseases, such as cancer. recover on their own, in some cases healthcare 
 providers may prescribe antibiotics.  Some 
How is it spread? antibiotics may lengthen the amount of time the 
In the childcare setting, Salmonella is usually bacteria are found in the stool, however. 
spread by the fecal-oral route.  The bacterium can  
also be spread by contaminated food or drink.  It How can the spread of this disease be 
is commonly found in uncooked or undercooked 
meat (especially beef), poultry and eggs, and prevented? 
unpasteurized milk.  Salmonella can also be 1. Wash hands thoroughly after using the 
spread to children and adults from infected pets toilet and diapering children. 
such as turtles, lizards, snakes, dogs, cats, 2. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
ducklings, chickens and other birds.  (NOTE: food. 
Because of this hazard, these types of animals 3. Be certain all foods in the childcare center 
should not be in childcare facilities.) are thoroughly cooked – especially beef, 
 poultry and eggs. 
What are the symptoms? 4. Any leftover food should be discarded. 

 5. Food preparation surfaces (e.g., tables, 
The intestinal illness caused by Salmonella is counters, cutting boards, kitchen utensils) 
characterized by diarrhea (mild or severe), fever, should be carefully washed and 
abdominal cramps and occasional vomiting. disinfected after preparing food. 
 6. Unpasteurized milk (goat or cow) is 
How soon do symptoms appear? frequently contaminated with Salmonella 
The symptoms generally appear from 6-72 hours and other bacteria; it should not be used in 
after exposure, usually appearing 12-36 hours. a childcare setting. 
Sometimes symptoms take up to 7 days to appear. 7. Staff with active diarrhea or 

gastrointestinal (GI) illness should not 
work in a childcare facility until they are 
free of symptoms for 48 hours. 

8. Keep children with diarrhea at home. 
9. High-risk animals like turtles and lizards 

should not be in child care settings. 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SALMONELLOSIS (cont.) 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Infected persons shall be excluded from 
foodhandling, working in a child care facility and 
from direct care of hospitalized and 
institutionalized patients until they are no longer 
infectious or symptomatic (48 hours after 
resolution of symptoms). 
 
Reportable? 
Yes.  Salmonella is reportable by New Hampshire 
law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 
271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SCABIES CONT. 

SCABIES 
 

Scabies is a common skin infestation caused by  
microscopic parasites called a mite.  The female Scabies is treated with one of several prescription 
mite burrows under the skin to lay her eggs, mite-killing creams or lotions, which are applied 
which subsequently hatch and start the infestation once to the skin and then washed off after a 
cycle again. specified period of time.  Medicine to relieve the 
 itching is often necessary.  (Note:  Even after 
Symptoms of scabies do not appear until weeks effective therapy, itching can persist for up to 2 to 
after exposure.  The skin reaction is probably due, 4 weeks).  Treatment is recommended for all 
in part, to a sensitization or “allergic” reaction to household members – even those without 
the mites.  On re-exposure, symptoms can start symptoms – due to the high likelihood of spread 
within days.  The infestation is in the form of an within a household.  Prophylactic treatment is also 
intensely itchy rash, which consists of red bumps recommended for people who have had direct 
and burrows (i.e., short, wavy, thread-like lines in skin-to-skin contact with an infected individual. 
the skin). Itching tends to increase at night.  
 How can the spread of this disease be 
Who gets this disease? prevented? 
Anyone who has contact with the mite can 1. Follow previously outlined principles of 
become infested with scabies. hand washing and cleanliness at the 
 childcare facility. 
How is it spread? 2. Children should not share personal items, 
The mite is spread by direct skin-to-skin contact, cribs, mats or clothing. 
or by skin contact with clothes, bedding, etc. that 3. Each child’s dirty clothing should be 
the mites have crawled onto.  The mites can stored separately and sent home for 
survive only three days off the body and cannot laundering. 
jump or fly.  They require direct contact with skin 4. If a case of scabies occurs in the daycare 
to spread.  The incubation period for this disease facility: 
is two to six weeks after exposure. a. Wash and dry on the hot cycle all 
 washable items belonging to the 
How is it diagnosed and treated? center that came into contact with 
It can be diagnosed by the typical appearance of the child’s skin during the 72 hours 
the rash and accompanying symptoms and by prior to treatment. 
examining skin scrapings under the microscope to b. Difficult to wash items (e.g., 
see the mite or its’ eggs. stuffed toys, pillows) can be stored 

in tightly closed plastic bags for 
four days and then used again.  
(Note: The mite cannot live off the 
body for more than three days). 

c. Thoroughly vacuum any carpet or 
upholstered furniture. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SCABIES CONT. 

5. Pesticide sprays are not recommended and 
can be harmful to people and animals. 

6. If a rash, which appears suspicious for 
scabies, is noticed on a child in the 
childcare center, tell the parents the child 
should be seen by a healthcare provider. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Infected individuals should be excluded until 
treatment is completed.  If two or more cases 
occur in the daycare center, call the Division of 
Public Health Services, Bureau of Infectious 
Disease Control for further recommendations. 
 
Reportable? 
No, scabies is not reportable by New Hampshire 
law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control.  However, 
Public Health Professionals are available for a 
consultation at (603) 271-4496.  

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SHIGELLOSIS 
 

Shigellosis is an intestinal illness caused by What is the treatment? 
Shigella, which is a family of bacteria that is Although most people with Shigellosis will 
comprised of 40 different types. recover on their own, antibiotics shorten both the  
 length of the illness and the amount of time 
Who gets this disease? bacteria is passed in the stool, which is 
Anyone can, but shigellosis is recognized more particularly important in daycare settings. 
often in young children.  
 How can the spread of this disease be 
How is it spread? prevented? 
Among small children in a childcare facility, the 1. Wash hands thoroughly after using the 
fecal-oral route usually spreads Shigella.  It takes toilet or diapering a child. 
very few swallowed Shigella bacteria to cause 2. Wash hands thoroughly before preparing 
infection (as opposed to Salmonella, which take food. 
many bacteria to cause infection); so it can easily 3. Keep children who have diarrhea at home. 
become a problem in a childcare setting.  Shigella 4. Staff with positive stool cultures for 
can also be spread through stool-contaminated Shigella should not prepare food or feed 
food, drink or water. children. 
  
What are the symptoms? Who should be excluded? 
Shigella can cause mild or severe diarrhea.  In Infected persons shall be excluded from food 
mild cases, a person may have only watery stools handling, from childcare facilities and from direct 
for several days.  In severe cases, the diarrhea care of hospitalized or institutionalized patients 
may have traces of blood or mucous and may lead until stool cultures are free of Shigella on two 
to dehydration.  Fever, severe cramps, vomiting, consecutive specimens collected not less than 24 
headache and even convulsions (in young hours apart.  If antibiotics have been taken, the 
children) can occur. initial cultures shall be obtained at least 48 hours 
 after the last dose. 
How soon do symptoms appear?  
The symptoms usually occur 2-4 days after Reportable? 
exposure, but it can be as long as seven days. Yes.  Shigellosis is reportable by New Hampshire 
 law to the Division of Public Health Services, 
Can a person have this disease without Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 
knowing it? 271-4496,  
Yes, Shigella can be in the stool of children or 
adult who are not sick and do not have diarrhea.  
These asymptomatic carriers may transmit 
infection; rarely the carrier state persists for 
months or longer. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



STREP THROAT & SCARLET FEVER 
 

Group-A Streptococci are bacteria that can cause Who can get this disease? 
a variety of illnesses, the most common of which Anyone can get strep throat or scarlet fever, but it 
are strep throat, scarlet fever and impetigo. is uncommon in children under three years of age 
 (as is rheumatic fever).  It is most common in 
Strep Throat is a sore throat caused by this school-aged children, in winter months and in 
bacterium.  Cold viruses, not strep bacteria, cause crowded situations (e.g., schools, childcare 
the vast majority of sore throats in both children centers).  Often if one person in a family gets it, 
and adults.  Strep sore throats tend to be other do also, especially brothers and sisters. 
accompanied by fever, tender swollen neck  
glands, headache and stomach ache but can also How is it spread? 
occur with cough, runny nose, or other cold During infections, strep is in nose and mouth 
symptoms. secretions so it can be coughed, sneezed or 
 smeared around on hands, dishes, food, toys and 
Scarlet Fever is a form of strep infection caused similar objects.  The incubation period is two to 
by bacteria that produce a substance, which five days.  Unlike colds, children are probably not 
causes a skin rash.  The rash is usually red with infectious during this incubation period.  Children 
fine bumps that feel like sand paper and is most are most likely to pass strep to others when they 
noticeable on the neck, chest, groin, or on the have symptoms and until they have been on 
inner surface of the knees, thighs and elbows.  antibiotic treatment for 24 hours. 
The rash does not usually involve the face, but  
cheeks are flushed and there is paleness around 
the mouth.  The tongue may be reddish and look How soon do symptoms appear? 
like the surface of a strawberry.  The rash may The symptoms generally appear within one to 
only last a few hours.  Scarlet fever is no more three days. Because of a possible association with 
serious then strep throat.   Reye’s Syndrome (i.e., vomiting, liver problems 
 and coma), salicylate-containing products (i.e., 
Treatment of strep infections with antibiotics may aspirin) are not recommended for control of fever. 
not dramatically change the length or severity of  
the sore throat symptoms or rash.  It is important How are they diagnosed and treated? 
to treat strep infections in children to prevent its The diagnosis of strep throat is made by a throat 
spread to others and the possible development of culture.  It usually takes 24-48 hours to grow the 
rheumatic fever. bacteria.  There are several recently developed 
 rapid tests, which can diagnose a strep infection in 
Note:  Rheumatic Fever (i.e., abnormalities of the less time.  Strep infections are treated with an oral 
heart valves and inflammation of the joints) is antibiotic for 10 days.  Occasionally a healthcare 
very rare in the United States today, but can provider may give a single long-lasting injection.  
develop five to six weeks after any type of Depending on the symptoms, the healthcare 
untreated strep infection.  In rare instances, provider may give antibiotics immediately or wait 
kidney disease can also occur following a strep for the throat culture results. 
infection. 
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



STREP THROAT & SCARLET FEVER 
(cont.) 

  
How can the spread of this disease be Reportable? 
prevented? No, this type of Streptococcal infection is not 

1. Enforce handwashing and general reportable by New Hampshire law to the Division 
cleanliness in the childcare facility.  If a of Public Health Services, Bureau of Infectious 
case of strep throat has been diagnosed, it Disease Control.  However, Public Health 
is particularly important to remember that: Professionals are available for consultation at 

a. Staff and children should wash (603) 271-4496.  
their hands after wiping/blowing 
noses and before eating or 
preparing food. 

b. Toys and surfaces should be 
washed and disinfected daily. 

c. Each child should have his/her 
own cup; preferably, disposable 
cups should be used. 

d. Food should not be shared. 
e. All eating utensils should be 

carefully washed in hot, soapy 
water, disinfected and air-dried.  A 
dishwasher is best. 

2. Keep children’s noses clean and dry; wash 
hands immediately after wiping noses. 

3 Teach children to cough/sneeze to one side 
toward the floor and into a tissue.  They 
need to wash their hands afterward. 

4 If there is a case of strep throat in the 
facility, children and staff who develop 
sore throat symptoms should be seen by 
their healthcare provider to be tested for 
strep.  Generally, children and staff who 
do not have symptoms do not need to be 
cultured. 

 
Who should be excluded? 
Children and staff should be excluded until 24 
hours after beginning antibiotic therapy and until 
there is no fever present. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



SWIMMER’S ITCH (Cercarial Dermatitis) 
 
Swimmer’s itch (Cercarial Dermatitis) is caused What is the treatment? 
by human contact with a parasite that normally is It is best to check with a physician for treatment.  
found in some species of birds or small animals.  Sometimes medication is given to ease the itching 
The adult stage of the parasite lives in the and allergic reaction.  If secondary infection 
animals’ intestines and is shed into the water with develops, antibiotic treatment may be indicated. 
excreted feces.  Snails feed off the waste and  
release the young parasite (called cercaria) into How can Swimmer’s Itch be prevented? 
the water.  When this parasite burrows into a 1. Avoid swimming in known infested 
person’s skin it causes an allergic, itchy rash.  The waters.  Swim in deeper water.  The 
parasite is commonly found at the water’s surface parasite is usually found in shallow 
and near the shore. waters.  Babies sitting along the shore are 
 most vulnerable. 
Who gets this disease? 2. Vigorously towel your entire body 
Anyone who swims in water where this parasite immediately upon leaving the water.  This 
lives is susceptible.  The parasite may live in both will help brush off any cercaria that may 
fresh and salt water. be on the skin, also rinsing off with a 
 quick shower as soon as you leave the 
How is it spread? water may be helpful. 
Most commonly, individuals get the infection by 3. Use a waterproof sunscreen.  This forms a 
swimming or wading in infested water and then chemical barrier that may prevent the 
allowing water to evaporate off the skin rather parasite from sticking to the body. 
than drying the skin with a towel.  The parasite  
(cercaria) will borrow underneath the person’s Who should be excluded? 
skin.  Because these parasites cannot develop There is no need to exclude someone from a 
inside a human, they soon die.  The infection is facility since Swimmer’s Itch is not spread from 
not spread from person-to-person. person-to-person. 
  
What are the symptoms? Reportable? 
The symptoms include an initial prickling No, Swimmer’s Itch is not reportable by New 
sensation after leaving the water shortly followed Hampshire law to the Division of Public Health 
by an itchy rash, which reaches maximum Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control. 
intensity in 2 to 3 days and can persist for a week.  However, public health professionals are available 
Scratching the area may result in secondary for consultation at (603)-271-4496. 
bacterial infections.  Repeated exposure increases  
a person’s sensitivity to the parasite, possibly For questions in sampling public swimming areas, 
resulting in more severe symptoms. please contact the NH Department of 

Environmental Services, Public Beach Sampling 
Program at (603) 271-0698. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



TETANUS 
 

Tetanus is a bacterium that lives in the soil and Tdap/Tetanus diphtheria and acellular pertussis 
can enter the body through a cut or wound.  The should be given once between the ages of 11-18 
bacteria produce a poisonous substance – years.  Booster doses of tetanus-diphtheria toxoid 
exotoxin – that causes the clinical illness. (Td) vaccine every 10 years after finishing the 
 childhood primary immunization series are 
Who gets this disease? necessary to maintain protection against tetanus.  
Tetanus occurs almost exclusively in Tdap is available as a one time dose for adults 
unimmunized or inadequately immunized who have not recently received a tetanus vaccine. 
persons. Previously having tetanus does not result Also, it is important to be sure that all cuts, 
in immunity to subsequent infections. Vaccination scrapes and puncture wounds are cleaned well 
is required after initial recovery. with soap and water.  Consult your healthcare 
 provider for need of tetanus vaccine after a 
How is it spread? wound. 
Unlike other vaccine-preventable diseases, tetanus  
is not spread from person-to-person.  It occurs Who should be excluded? 
when the bacterium in soil or dust is introduced There is no need for the child or the childcare 
into the body through a wound. worker to be excluded as tetanus is not spread 
 from person-to-person. 
What are the symptoms?  
The poisonous exotoxin produced by the Reportable? 
Clostridium tetani bacteria causes muscles to go Yes, tetanus is reportable by New Hampshire law 
into spasms of the face/neck, abdomen, or area to the Division of Public Health Services, Bureau 
where the initial infection occurred.  Paralysis and of Infectious Disease Control at (603) 271-4496.  
death can result.  Sometimes tetanus is called 
“lockjaw”. 
 
How can Tetanus be prevented? 
The Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) recommends immunizing 
children against tetanus – along with diphtheria 
and pertussis – beginning as early as six weeks of 
age. The diphtheria-tetanus-acellular pertussis 
(DTaP) vaccine is required for both childcare 
and school attendance. The five dose series should 
be completed at 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, 
and 15-18 months, and 4-6 years of age 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



TUBERCULOSIS 
 
Tuberculosis (TB) is a disease caused by a certain Persons who have been exposed to an active case 
type of bacterium. A person who is sick with of TB, persons born in a foreign country (where 
active tuberculosis disease may spread the germ TB is common), people infected with HIV 
when they cough or sneeze.  If others inhale the (human immunodeficiency virus), healthcare 
bacteria from the air, they may become infected.  workers and pre-school age childcare staff.  It is a 
But not everyone who is exposed will become law that persons with a positive IGRA be reported 
infected.  A person with Latent TB infection does to the Bureau of Infectious Disease Control. 
not feel sick and cannot spread the germs to Persons who have a documented positive reaction 
others. to a TB skin test do not need repeat skin tests.  All 
 persons with a positive skin test or a positive 
Does infection mean you will be sick? IGRA should be evaluated yearly for signs of 
No.  Many people were infected with TB many active disease.   
years ago when the disease was very common.   
Only 5-10% of people who are infected will ever How can TB be prevented? 
get the disease unless they have an impaired People who have a positive reaction to a TB skin 
immune system. test or a positive IGRA can prevent disease by 
 taking medications. 
What is a TB  test?  
A skin test is a method of determining if a person Who should be excluded? 
has been infected with the TB germ.  A positive A person with a positive TB skin test or positive 
TB skin test reaction, however, does NOT IGRA should have a medical examination and a 
necessarily mean the person has TB disease.  chest x-ray and discuss with a healthcare provider 
 about taking preventive therapy.  Persons 
Like the skin test there is a blood test that can test diagnosed or suspected to have active TB disease 
for tuberculosis infection. This test is often called should be reported immediately to the Bureau of 
an IGRA (Interferon gamma release assay). The Infectious Disease Control and should be 
IGRA does not diagnose active TB disease. The excluded from attending or working in a childcare 
IGRA is currently not recommended for children center until they are determined to be non-
under two. infectious by both a healthcare provider and the 
 Bureau of Infectious Disease Control. 
How is the test given?  
For the skin test--a small amount of PPD (purified Reportable? 
protein derivative) is injected just under the Yes.  Suspect and cases of active tuberculosis and 
surface of the skin on the forearm.  In 48 to 72 persons with a positive IGRA are reportable by 
hours, a healthcare provider or nurse will read the New Hampshire law to the Division of Public 
test by inspecting the skin. Health Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease 
The IGRA is a simple blood draw and there is no Control at (603) 271-4496.  
return visit for reading necessary and a doctor will  
help determine the results.  
   
 
Who should have tuberculosis test? 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



West Nile Virus (cont.) 

WEST NILE VIRUS 
 
 

What is West Nile virus?  
West Nile virus (WNV) is an uncommon but Who is at risk for West Nile virus? 
serious mosquito-borne infection.  The virus can Anyone can get WNV, but some people are at 
be transmitted to horses, other animals, and, in increased risk, such as people living in or visiting 
rare cases, people. areas where the disease is common, or people 
 who work outside or participate in outdoor 
How do people get West Nile virus? recreational activities in areas where the disease is 
WNV is spread by the bite of an infected common.  Persons older than 50 years of age are 
mosquito.  Mosquitoes become infected when more likely to develop serious symptoms of WNV 
they feed on infected birds.  Infected mosquitoes if they do get sick and should take special care to 
can then spread WNV to humans and other avoid mosquito bites.  All donated blood is 
animals when they bite.  In a very small number checked for WNV before being used.  The risk of 
of cases, WNV also has been spread through getting WNV through blood transfusions and 
blood transfusions or organ transplants, organ transplants is very small, and should not 
breastfeeding and even during pregnancy from prevent people who need surgery from having it.  
mother to baby.  WNV is not spread through If you have concerns, talk to your health care 
casual contact such as touching or kissing a professional. 
person with the virus.  
 What is the treatment for West Nile 
What are the symptoms of West Nile Virus? 
virus in humans? There is no specific treatment for WNV.  In more 
Most WNV infections do not cause any severe cases, intensive supportive therapy is 
symptoms.  Mild WNV infections can cause indicated, i.e., hospitalization, intravenous (IV) 
fever, headache and body aches, often with a skin fluids and nutrition, airway management, 
rash and swollen lymph glands.  In a small ventilator support (ventilator) if needed, and 
percentage of people infected by the virus, the prevention of secondary infections (pneumonia, 
disease can be serious, even fatal.  Most severe urinary tract, etc). 
infections can cause headache, high fever, neck  
stiffness, stupor, disorientation, coma, tremors, How common is West Nile virus? 
convulsions, paralysis, and sometimes death. WNV was first identified in NH in 2000.  WNV 
 has been found in horses, mosquitoes and several 
How soon after exposure do symptoms species of birds.  Since 2010 three human cases of 
appear? WNV were reported in the state.  
Symptoms of WNV usually appear 2 to 14 days,  
but usually 2-6 days after the bite of an infected How can West Nile virus be prevented? 
mosquito. A vaccine is available for horses, but not for 
 humans.  Prevention of the disease centers around 
How is West Nile virus diagnosed? controlling mosquitoes and on individual action to 
Diagnosis is based on tests of blood or spinal avoid mosquito bites.  To avoid being bitten by 
fluid. the mosquitoes that transmit WNV: 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



West Nile Virus (cont.) 

• If possible, stay inside between dusk and 
dawn, when mosquitoes are most active. 

• When outside between dusk and dawn, 
wear long pants and long-sleeved shirts. 

• Use an insect repellent with DEET or 
Picaridin according to manufacture’s 
directions when outside.  Oil of lemon 
eucalyptus and IR3535 have been found to 
provide protection similar to repellents 
with low concentrations of DEET. 

• Put screens on windows and make sure 
they do not have holes. 

• Eliminate standing water and other 
mosquito breeding locations from your 
property.  Do not alter natural water 
bodies.  The management of ponds and 
wetlands is regulated by the Department of 
Environmental Services and any 
alterations require a permit before work 
may begin. 

 
For specific concerns about West Nile virus, call 
the New Hampshire Division of Public Health 
Services, Bureau of Infectious Disease Control at 
(603) 271-4496. For further information, refer to 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
website at www.cdc.gov or the New Hampshire 
department of Health & Human Services website 
at www.dhhs.nh.gov. 
 
 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



 
 
 
 

REFERENCE LIST 
 
 
 
 
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2011). National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care 
and Early Education. Caring for our Children: National health safety performance standards; 
Guidelines for early care and education programs. 3rd Ed. Elk Grove Village, IL. 
 
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). Red Book, 2015 Report of the Committee on Infectious Diseases, 
30th Edition. 
 
American Academy of Pediatrics. Managing Infectious Diseases in Child Care and in Schools. A Quick 
Reference Guide, 2nd Edition. Elk Grove Village, IL.  
 
Aronson, S., & Shope, T. Eds. (2006). Infection Control in the Child Care Center and Preschool, 7th ed. 
Silverchair Science and Communications Inc. 
 
Hamborsky J., Kroger, A., Wolfe S., Ed. (2015). Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-Preventable 
Diseases, 13th Edition, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Washington DC: Public Health 
Foundation. 
 
Heymann, D. (2014).  Control of Communicable Diseases Manual, , 20th Edition, APHA Press. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



GLOSSARY 
 

Antibody – A protein substance produced by the Diarrhea – Increased number of stools 
defense system in response to something foreign.  compared with a person’s normal pattern, along 
Antibodies help protect against infections. with watery stools, and/or decreased stool form.  
 Uncontrolled diarrhea is diarrhea that cannot be 
Asymptomatic – Without symptoms.  For contained by the diaper or use of the toilet. 
example, a child may have the hepatitis A virus in  
the stool and not have symptoms of illness, but Direct Contact – Diseases that are spread by 
will still be able to infect others. touching the infected area on another person’s 
 skin or occasionally by touching an object that is 
Bacteria/Bacterium – One celled organism contaminated with infectious secretions or 
with a cell wall that can survive in and out of the parasites. 
body.  They are much larger than viruses, and they  
can usually be treated effectively with antibiotics.  Disinfection – Killing of germs outside of the 
Examples of bacteria include Salmonella body with chemical (e.g., bleach, alcohol), or 
enteritidis and Bordetella pertussis.  Bacterium is physical (e.g., heat) agents.  Surfaces should be 
singular, bacteria, plural. cleaned first and then disinfected. 
  
Bloodborne – A disease that can be transmitted Enteric – Describing infections of the intestines 
through the blood. (often with diarrhea). 
  
Carrier – A person who is infected with a Febrile – Having a fever. 
specific organism, who has no symptoms of  
disease and who can spread the disease to others.  Fever – An elevation of body temperature. 
For example, some children may be carriers of the  
organism Haemophilus influenza or Giardia Hygiene – Protective measures taken by 
lamblia and have no symptoms. individuals to promote health and limit the spread 
 of infectious diseases.  These include: a) washing 
Chronic – An infection or illness that lasts a hands with soap and running water after using the 
long time (i.e., months or years). toilet, after handling anything contaminated, and 
 before eating or handling food; b) keeping hands, 
Communicable – When an infected person is hair and unclean items away from the mouth, 
capable of spreading infection to another person. nose, eyes, ears, genitals and wounds; c) avoiding 
 the use of common or unclean eating utensils, 
Contagious Period (Communicable drinking glasses, towels, handkerchiefs, combs 
Period) – The period of time when an infected and hairbrushes; d) preventing exposure to 
person is capable of spreading infection to another droplets from the nose and mouth by covering the 
person. face when coughing or sneezing; e) washing hands 
 thoroughly after caring for another person; and f) 
Contamination – The presence of infectious keeping the body clean by frequent (at least daily) 
germs in or on the body, on environmental baths or showers using soap and water. 
surfaces, on articles of clothing, or in food or 
water. 
 
Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018 



GLOSSARY (cont.) 

Immunity – The body’s ability to fight a Prophylaxis – Measures taken at the time of 
particular infection.  For example, a child acquires exposure of an infectious disease, or shortly 
immunity to diseases such as measles, mumps, thereafter, to try and prevent the disease.  This 
rubella and pertussis after natural infection or by may include medication or special immunization. 
immunization.  Newborns initially have the same  
immune status as their mothers.  This type of Purulent – Forming or containing pus. 
immunity usually disappears within the first six  
months of life. Secretions – Wet material produced by cells or 
 glands, which has a specific purpose in the body, 
Immunizations – Vaccines that are given to such as saliva. 
children and adults to help them develop  
protection (antibodies) against specific infections.  Systemic – Pertaining to a whole body rather 
Vaccines may contain an inactivated or killed than to one of its parts. 
agent, or a weakened live organism.  Childhood  
immunizations include protection against 
diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio, measles, Transmission – The passing of an infectious 
mumps, rubella, Haemophilus influenza type b, organism or germ from a source of infection to a 
hepatitis A, hepatitis B and varicella.  Adults need person.  (Examples:  person-to-person or animal to 
to be protected against measles, mumps, rubella, person). 
tetanus and diphtheria, and chicken pox.  
 Virus – A microscopic organism, smaller than 
Incubation Period – Time between exposure bacteria, which may cause disease.  Viruses can 
to an infectious agent and the beginning of grow or reproduce only in living cells.  Examples 
symptoms. of viruses include hepatitis B, HIV and the 
 common cold. . 
Infection  

 – When an infectious agent multiplies 
in the body. 
 
Infectious – Capable of causing an infection. 
 
Jaundice (icterus) – Yellowing of the eyes or 
skin. 
 
Organisms – Living things.  Often used as a 
general term for germs (e.g., bacteria, viruses, 
fungi, parasites) that can cause disease. 
 
Parasite – An organism that lives on or in 
another living organism. 
 
Pathogen – Disease causing organism. 

Division of Public Health Services  Disease Handbook for Childcare Providers 
Bureau of Infectious Disease Control   REVISED –January 2018