by this www.skudra.net

Any screen. 
Any time.  
Anywhere.
Activate the eBook version  
of this title at no additional charge. 

Student Consult eBooks give you the power to browse and find content,  
view enhanced images, share notes and highlights—both online and offline.

Unlock your eBook today.
1   Visit studentconsult.inkling.com/redeem Scan this QR code to redeem your  

eBook through your mobile device: 
2   S cratch off your code
3   Type code into “Enter Code” box
4   C lick “Redeem”
5   L og in or Sign up
6   G o to “My Library”

It’s that easy!
Place Peel Off 
Sticker Here

For technical assistance:  
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com 
call 1-800-401-9962 (inside the US)  
call +1-314-447-8200 (outside the US)

Use of the current edition of the electronic version of this book (eBook) is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on 
studentconsult.inkling.com.  Access to the eBook is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book, at studentconsult.inkling.com and 
may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means. 

2015v1.0



HUTCHISON’S 
CLINICAL 
METHODS



Executive Content Strategist: Laurence Hunter
Content Development Specialist: Carole McMurray
Project Manager: Louisa Talbott
Designer: Christian Bilbow
Illustration Manager: Amy Faith Heyden
Illustrator: Sara Jarret, CMI; Amanda Williams



24th Edition

HUTCHISON’S 
CLINICAL 
METHODS
An integrated approach to clinical practice

Edited by

Michael Glynn MA MD FRCP FHEA
Consultant Physician, Gastroenterologist and Hepatologist 
Barts Health NHS Trust; 
Honorary Senior Lecturer 
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry; 
Former National Clinical Director for GI and Liver Diseases 
NHS England

William M. Drake DM FRCP
Professor of Clinical Endocrinology 
St Bartholomew’s Hospital 
London, UK

Edinburgh  London  New York  Oxford  Philadelphia  St Louis  Sydney  Toronto  2018



© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information 
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on 
how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies 
and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the 
Copyright Licensing Agency can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.

This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright 
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

First edition 1897
Twenty-fourth edition 2018

ISBN  978-0-7020-6739-6
International ISBN  978-0-7020-6740-2

Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and 
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional 
practices or medical treatment may become necessary.

Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge  
in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described 
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own  
safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional 
responsibility.

With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to 
check the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the 
manufacturer of each product to be administered to verify the recommended dose or 
formula, the method and duration of administration and contraindications. It is the 
responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of their 
patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each 
individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.

To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or 
editors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a 
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any 
methods, products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein.

The  
publisher’s 

policy is to use
paper manufactured 

from sustainable forests

Printed in China

Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1



Preface to the Twenty-fourth Edition

Hutchison’s Clinical Methods is a book for students situations, the core body systems and key clinical 
of all ages and all degrees of experience. Although specialties. Overall, this forms a logical sequence if 
the scope, complexity and technology of clinical read straight through but also allows study of each 
medicine continues to evolve with great speed, the section separately.
aim of this text is exactly as it was when Robert As in previous editions, new contributors have 
Hutchison published the very first edition in 1897: joined the book. Some have written entirely new 
to provide insight into the acquisition of the traditional chapters and others have modified the work of their 
clinical skills of history taking and physical examina- predecessors (including the work of Alan Naftalin, 
tion leading to the formulation of a differential Consultant Gynaecologist, who has sadly died since 
diagnosis and management plan. This approach the last edition was published). All the contributors 
remains as essential as ever to providing good patient are accustomed to working closely together and the 
care; indeed, as the array of potential investigations book reflects these professional relationships. It is the 
expands (and the overall cost continues to rise), it is editors’ responsibility to mould the chapters into a 
imperative that such technological advances are single text with a logical narrative, but the expertise 
integrated with traditional methods. Even though lies with the contributing authors, whose time and 
many patients now have easy access, via the Internet, dedication is gratefully acknowledged, as are the 
to information about disease and diagnosis, it is the extensive contributions of previous experts.
editors’ experience that patients appreciate just as Some of the changes to the previous edition have 
much as ever time spent listening to their symptoms, been made as a result of formally gathered feedback 
careful physical examination and simple human from the newly formed International Advisory Board. 
compassion. Although the circumstances of clinical In addition a reader survey elicited a range of positive 
practice of the readers will vary hugely across the suggestions for improvements to the book. Construc-
world (with different structures and levels of funding tive readers’ comments direct to the editors are always 
of healthcare), a sound clinical method is indispen- welcome.
sable. The organisation of this edition adheres to 
Hutchison’s original approach, with sections on the Michael Glynn and Will Drake
overall patient assessment, assessment in particular Royal London and St Batholomew’s Hospitals



This page intentionally left blank



Sir Robert Hutchison MD FRCP 
(1871-1960)

Clinical Methods began in 1897, three years after Robert 
Hutchison was appointed Assistant Physician to The 
London Hospital (named the Royal London Hospital 
since its 250th anniversary in 1990). He was appointed 
full physician to The London and to the Hospital for 
Sick Children, Great Ormond Street in 1900. He steered 
Clinical Methods through no less than 13 editions, at 
first with the assistance of Dr H. Rainy and then, from 
the 9th edition, published in 1929, with the help of 
Dr Donald Hunter. Although Hutchison retired from 
hospital practice in 1934, he continued to direct new 
editions of the book with Donald Hunter, and from 
1949 with the assistance also of Dr Richard Bomford. 
The 13th edition, the first produced without Hutchison’s 
guiding hand, was published in 1956 under the direction 
of Donald Hunter and Richard Bomford. Dr A. Stuart 
Mason and Dr Michael Swash joined Richard Bomford 
on Donald Hunter’s retirement to produce the 16th 
edition, published in 1975, and following Richard 
Bomford’s retirement prepared the 17th, 18th and 
19th editions. Dr Swash edited the 20th and 21st 
editions himself and was joined by Dr Michael Glynn 
for the 22nd edition. On Dr Swash’s retirement Prof 
William Drake joined Dr Glynn as a co-editor on the 
23rd and now this 24th edition. In keeping with the 
tradition that lies behind the book, each of these editions 
has been revised with the help of colleagues at 
The Royal London Hospital, and the other hospitals 
which now form Barts Health NHS Trust, namely St 
Bartholomew’s Hospital, Whipps Cross University 
Hospital and Newham University Hospital.

Sir Robert Hutchison died in 1960 in his 90th year. 
It is evident from the memoirs of his contemporaries 
that he had a remarkable personality. Many of his 
clinical sayings became, in their day, aphorisms to be 
remembered and passed on to future generations of 
students. Of these, the best known is his petition, 
written in 1953, his 82nd year:

‘From inability to let well alone;  
from too much zeal for the new  
and contempt for what is old;  
from putting knowledge before wisdom, science 
before art, and cleverness before common sense; 
from treating patients as cases;  
and from making the cure of the disease more 
grievous than the endurance of the same, Good 
Lord, deliver us.’

Michael Glynn and Will Drake
Royal London Hospital



This page intentionally left blank



Contributors
Rino Cerio BSc FRCP(Lon) FRCP(Edin) FRCPath James Green LLM FRCS(Urol)
DipRCPath ICDPath Consultant Urological Surgeon
Consultant Dermatologist and Professor  Department of Urology
of Dermatopathology Whipps Cross University Hospital
Department of Cutaneous Medicine and Surgery Barts Health NHS Trust;
Barts Health NHS Trust Visiting Professor
London, UK London South Bank University

London, UK
Tahseen A. Chowdhury MD FRCP
Consultant Physician Lina Hijazi
Department of Diabetes and Metabolism Consultant Physician
Barts Health NHS Trust Associate Foundation Programme Director
London, UK Whipps Cross University Hospital

Barts Health NHS Trust
Andrew Coombes BSc MBBS FRCOphth London, UK
Consultant Eye Surgeon and Lead Clinician  
for Ophthalmology Ali Jawad MBChB MSc(Lond) DCH FRCP(Lond) 
Barts Health NHS Trust; FRCP(Edin) DMedRehab
Honorary Senior Lecturer Consultant Rheumatologist
Barts and the London School of Medicine  Barts Health NHS Trust
and Dentistry London, UK
London, UK

Stephen Kelly MB ChB MRCP
Ceri Davies MD FRCP Consultant Rheumatologist
Consultant Cardiologist Barts Health NHS Trust
Barts Health NHS Trust London, UK
London, UK

Rehan Khan MRCOG DipIPM
William M. Drake DM FRCP Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist
Professor of Clinical Endocrinology St Bartholomew’s and Royal London Hospitals
St Bartholomew’s Hospital Barts and the London NHS Trust
London, UK London, UK

Adam Feather FRCP Richard Langford MB BS
Consultant Acute Physician Consultant in Anaesthesia and Pain Medicine
Barts Health NHS Trust Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK London, UK

Michael Glynn MA MD FRCP FHEA Geraint Morris BMedSc MB BS FRCP DCH FRCEM
Consultant Physician, Gastroenterologist  Consultant in Emergency Medicine
and Hepatologist Homerton University Hospital Foundation  
Barts and the London NHS Trust; NHS Trust
Honorary Senior Lecturer London, UK
Barts and the London School of Medicine  
and Dentistry; John Peters FRCS
Regional Adviser, Royal College of Physicians Consultant Urologist
(London) Whipps Cross University Hospital

Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK



x
Contributors

Shankar Ramaswamy MBBS MD FRCA  Trevor Turner
FFPMRCA EDRA Honorary Consultant Psychiatrist
Locum Consultant in Anaesthesia and  East London Foundation Trust;
Pain Medicine Former Vice-President of the Royal College  
Barts and the London NHS Trust of Psychiatrists
London, UK London, UK

Anna Riddell BSc MBBS MRCPCH Rodney W.H. Walker MA BM PhD FRCP
Consultant Paediatrician Consultant Neurologist
The Royal London Children’s Hospital Barts Health NHS Trust
Barts Health NHS Trust London, UK
London, UK

Michael P. Wareing MBBS BSc FRCS(ORL-HNS)
Andrew Rochford MSc FRCP Consultant Otolaryngologist, Head and  
Consultant Gastroenterologist Neck Surgeon
Barts Health NHS Trust Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK London, UK

Caryn Rosmarin MBBCh DTM&H FCPath(SA) Veronica L.C. White
FRCPath(UK) Consultant Respiratory Physician
Consultant Microbiologist Barts and the London NHS Trust
Division of Infection London, UK
Barts and the London School of Medicine  
and Dentistry
Barts and the London NHS Trust
London, UK



International Advisory Board

Dr Maisam Waid Akroush Dr Aniruddha Ghose
Consultant Gastro-hepatologist, Amman, Jordan Associate Professor, Department of Medicine, 

Chittagong Medical College, Chittagong, 
Dr Ala’ Al-Heresh Bangladesh
Clinical Associate Professor, Senior Consultant 
Physician and Rheumatologist, Head of Professor Christeine Ariaranee Gnanathasan
Rheumatology Unit, King Hussein Medical Center, Professor in Medicine, Department of Clinical 
Royal Medical Services, Jordan Medicine, University of Colombo; Honorary 

Consultant Physician, University Medical Unit, 
Dr Mohammad Radwan Al-Majali National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka
Clinical Fellow in Cardiology, Jordan Royal 
Medical Services, Amman, Jordan Dr Ambanna Gowda

Consultant Physician and Diabetologist, Fortis 
Dr Md Robed Amin Hospital; Associate Professor of Medicine, Dr BR 
Associate Professor of Medicine, Dhaka Medical Ambedkar Medical College, Bengaluru, India
College, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Dr A L Kakrani
Dr M A Andrews Professor and Head, Department of Medicine, Dr  
Professor and Head of Department of Medicine, D Y Patil Medical College, Hospital & Research 
Government Medical College, Thrissur, Kerala, Centre and Dean, Faculty of Medicine, Dr DY 
India Patil Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pimpri, Pune, 

India
Professor Raghavendra Bhat
Professor and Head of Department of General Professor Alladi Mohan
Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, Professor and Head of Department of Medicine, 
India Sri Venkateswara Institute of Medical Sciences, 

Tirupati, India
Dr Deepak Bhosle
Professor, Department of Medicine, Bharati Professor Jotideb Mukhopadhyay
Vidyapeeth Deemed University Medical College, Professor and Head of Department of Medicine, 
Pune, India Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and 

Research, Seth Sukhlal Karnani Memorial Medical 
Dr Vivek Chauhan College, Kolkata, India
Assistant Professor, Medicine, Dr Rajendra Prasad 
Government Medical College Kangra at Tanda, Dr E Prabhu
Himachal Pradesh, India Senior Consultant and Head, Institute of Nuclear 

Imaging and Molecular Medicine and Chief 
Professor Md. Abdul Jalil Chowdhury Coordinator, Institute of Advanced Research  
Professor of Internal Medicine, Bangabandhu in Health Sciences, Tamil Nadu Government  
Sheikh Mujib Medical University; Honorary Multi Super Speciality Hospital, Omandurar 
Secretary, Bangladesh College of Physicians and Government Estate, Chennai 2, Tamil Nadu, India
Surgeons (BCPS), Dhaka, Bangladesh

Professor Dr T. Ravindran
Dr D Dalus Professor of Medicine, Government Kilpauk 
Professor and Head, Department of Internal Medical College, Chennai, India
Medicine, Medical College and Hospital, 
Trivandrum, India



xii
International Advisory Board

Professor M.D. Selvam Professor I. Uthman
Professor of Medicine, Sri Muthukumaran Medical Professor of Clinical Medicine, Head, Division of 
College Hospital and Research Institute, Chennai; Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Former Professor of Medicine, Stanley Medical American University of Beirut Medical Center, 
College and Government Stanley Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon
Chennai, India



Acknowledgements

The Editors would like to acknowledge the contribu- Prakriti Gupta; Nishedh Gyawali; Riffat Humayun; 
tion of all past authors to this textbook. Each Mobin Imtiaz; Vibhu Jain; Ruwandika Jayawickrama; 
new edition builds on the expertise of the many Govind Jha; Tushar Jha; Kaushal Raj Kafle; 
writers whose work has shaped this book over more Sowmyashree Mayur Kaku; Pavan Kamble; Kiran 
than a century. In particular we would like to Kanchankoti; Vivekanand Kattimani; Abhishek 
acknowledge the following who stepped down after Kaushik; Muneeb Khalid; Sharoj Khan; Zahila Khan; 
the last edition to allow new authors to take their Supreet Khare; Balaram Krishna; Anita Kum; Akshay 
place: Runa Ali; Andrew Archbold; David D’Cruz; Kumar; Amit Kumar; Deepak Kumar; Manish Kumar; 
Jayne Gallagher; Robert Ghosh; Beng Goh; John Praveen Kumar; Vivek Kumar; Dhairya Lakhani; Mirza 
Monson; John Moore-Gillon; the late Alan Naftalin; Umm E Laila; Manikho Lawrence; Jin Xiang Lui; 
Serge Nikolic; Ruth Taylor; Adam Timmis; and Raj Mohd Luqman; Surjeet Kumar Malakar; Aaron 
Thuraisingham. Mascarenhas; Abhishek Mittal; Patel Mrugank; 

The Editors and Publishers would like to thank all Abhishek Mittal; Sudeb Mukherjee; Vineet Nair; 
the students and doctors who have provided valuable Naren Srinath Nallapeta; Dilip Neupane; Patel Nida; 
feedback on this textbook and whose comments have Avinash Pallav; Anup Pandeya; Ambikapathi 
helped shape this new edition. We hope we have Panneerselvam; Sabin Parajuli; Ashwin Singh Parihar; 
listed all those who have contributed and apologise Kishor Pokharel; Arun Prasad; Nikhil Prasad; Varun 
if any names have been accidentally omitted. Venkat Raghavan MS; Vishal Raj; Pradhum Ram; Jai 

As part of the publishers’ review, students from Ranjan; Piyush Ranjan; Amuda Regmi; Sudeep Regmi; 
numerous medical schools supplied many innovative Sudip Regmi; Peter Richards; Arpit Rustagi; Simrina 
ideas on how to enhance the book. We are indebted Kaur Sabharwal; Sujit Kumar Sah; Shreyas Samaga; 
to the following for their enthusiastic support: Emir Bipin Sapkota; Priyanka Satish; Somya Saxena; 
Abadi; Suhel Abbas; Shaik Kariuddin Abdullah; Deeksha Seth; Sakhi Shah; Syed Mohammad Usman 
Santosh Acharya; Mamun David Ebne Ahamed; Shah; Anmol Sharma; Anurag Sharma; Bhanu Sharma; 
Salsabil Alfadly; Nouman Safdar Ali; Hemant Atri; Dhan Bahadur Shrestha; Jeevan Shrestha; Suhana 
Keerthi Ananthula; Noah Anvesh; Sumant Arora; Shrestha; Veena Shriram; Amber Tahir Siddiqui; Ankita 
Mohan Babu; Pirmal Bachani; Suranjana Banik; Ankit Singh; Arashdeep Singh; Avinainder Singh; Bishnu 
Bansal; Siddhartha Barnawal; Suranjana Basak; Singh; Jeevika Singh; Nidhi Singh; Chopperla SK SK 
Manognya Bethapudi; Sunil Bhardwaj; Ifrah Binyamin; Dattatreya Sitaram; Sakar Raj Sitaula; Soundarya 
Sagnik Biswas; Sugandh Chadha; Subhankar Soundararajan; Amit Srivastava; Shashank K. 
Chatterjee; Prajwal Dahal; Amrutha Denduluri; Ugur Srivastava; Sepuri Bala Ravi Teja; Priyesh Thakurathi; 
Demirpek; Mansi Dhingra; Shubham Dixit; Arpan Akhilesh Tripathi; Subhrajyoti Tripathy; Mohammad 
Dutta; Mohammed Omar Farooq; Samreen Fathima; Yousuf Ul Islam; Rajiv Vasusumi; Ashwin P Vinod; 
Neil Dominic Fernanes; Priya Gala; Vikash Gautam; Farhan Khan Virk; Waiz A. Wasey; Rajat Kumar Yadav; 
Apeksha Ghai; Spandita Ghosh; Akanksha Grover; Saroj Yadav; and Vikrant Yadav.



This page intentionally left blank



Contents

SECTION 1 11.	Patients in pain	 157
General patient assessment Richard M. Langford and  

Shankar Ramaswamy
1.	Doctor and patient: General  

principles of history taking	 3 SECTION 3
Michael Glynn Basic systems

2.	General patient examination and 12.	Respiratory system	 167
differential diagnosis	 15 Veronica L.C. White
William M. Drake and  
Tahseen A. Chowdhury 13.	Cardiovascular system	 189

Ceri Davies
3.	The next steps: Differential  

diagnosis and initial  14.	Gastrointestinal system	 241
Andrew Rochford and Michael Glynn

management	 31
Michael Glynn 15.	Locomotor system	 273

Stephen Kelly
4.	Ethical considerations	 37

William M. Drake 16.	Nervous system	 309
Rodney W.H. Walker

SECTION 2 17.	Urogenital system	 355
Assessment in particular groups John Peters, James Green and Lina Hijazi

18.	Endocrine and metabolic  
5.	Women	 45

Rehan Khan disorders	 379
Tahseen A. Chowdhury and  

6.	Children and adolescents	 63 William M. Drake
Anna Riddell 19.	Skin, nails and hair	 403

7.	Older people	 85 Rino Cerio
Adam Feather 20.	Eyes	 419

8.	Psychiatric assessment	 99 Andrew Coombes
Trevor Turner 21.	Ear, nose and throat	 439

9.	Patients presenting as  Michael J. Wareing
emergencies	 121
Geraint Morris 	 Index	 465

10.	Patients with a fever	 141
Caryn Rosmarin and Ali Jawad



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION 1
General patient assessment
	 1.	 Doctor and patient: General principles  

of history taking
	 2.	 General patient examination and differential diagnosis
	 3.	 The next steps: Differential diagnosis and  

initial management
	 4.	 Ethical considerations    



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION ONE
GENERAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT

Doctor and patient: 
General principles of history taking 1 

Michael Glynn

Introduction There are two main steps to making a diagnosis:
1	 To establish the clinical features by history and 

If asked why they entered medicine, most doctors examination – this represents the clinical 
would say that they wish to relieve human suffering database.
and disease. In order to achieve this aim for every 2	 To interpret the clinical database in terms of 
patient, it is essential to understand what has gone disordered function and potential causative 
wrong with normal human physiology in that indi- pathologies, whether physical, mental, social or 
vidual and how the patient’s personality, beliefs and a combination of these.
environment are interacting with the disease process. This book is about this process. This first chapter 
History taking and clinical examination are initial introduces the basic principles of history taking 
but crucial steps to achieving this understanding, and examination, while more detail about the history 
even in an era in which the availability of sophisticated and examination of each system (cardiovascular, 
investigations might suggest to a lay person that a respiratory, etc.) is set out in individual succeeding 
blood test or scan will give all the answers. In addition, chapters. Throughout the book, the patient is referred 
even though many diseases are now curable, the relief to as ‘he’, the editors preferring this to ‘he/she’ or 
of symptoms is usually what the patient expects from ‘they’ (except in specific scenarios involving female 
the medical process. patients).

The phrase ‘Clinical Methods’ is used less than it 
used to be. It can be defined as the set of skills doctors 
use to diagnose and treat disease and the manner in Setting the scene
which doctors approach clinical problems and relate 
to patients. The skills that make up Clinical Methods Most medical encounters or consultations do not 
are acquired during a lifetime of medical work, and occur in hospital wards or Emergency Departments 
they evolve and change as new techniques and new but in primary care or outpatient settings. Whatever 
concepts arise and as the experience and maturity the setting, a certain familiarity to the context of 
of the doctor develop. Clinical methods are acquired the consultation, including the consulting room 
by a combination of study and experience, and there itself, the waiting area and all the associated staff, 
is always something new to learn. makes the process of clinical diagnosis easier. Patients 

The aims of any first consultation are to understand are less often assessed in their own home than previ-
patients’ own perceptions of their problems and to ously, and many doctors now find this a strange 
start or complete the process of diagnosis. This double concept.
aim requires knowledge of disease and its patterns Meeting the patient in the waiting room allows 
of presentation, together with an ability to interpret the doctor to make an early assessment of his 
a patient’s symptoms (what the patient reports/ demeanour, hearing, walking and any accompanying 
complains of, e.g. cough or headache) and the findings persons. It is good to offer a greeting and careful 
on observation or physical examination (called physical introduction and to observe the response unobtrusively 
signs or, often, simply ‘signs’). Appropriate skills are but with care. It is important to remember that 
needed to elicit the symptoms from the patient’s patients are easily confused by medical titles and 
description and conversation and the signs by observa- hierarchies. All of the following questions should be 
tion and by physical examination. This requires not quickly assessed:
only experience and considerable knowledge of people ■	 Does the patient appear relaxed and smiling or 
in general, but also the skill to strike up a relationship, furtive and anxious?
in a short space of time, with a range of very different ■	 Does the patient make good eye contact?
individuals. ■	 Is he frightened or depressed?



4 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
■	 Are posture and stance normal?
■	 Is he short of breath or wheezing? Beginning the history

In some conditions (e.g. congestive heart failure, The process of gathering information about a patient 
acute asthma, Parkinson’s disease, stroke, jaundice), often begins by reading any referral documentation 
the general nature of the problem is immediately and with the immediate introduction of doctor and 
obvious. It is very important to identify the patient patient. However, once the social introductions 
correctly, particularly if he has a name that is very are achieved, the doctor will usually begin with a 
common in the local community. Carefully check single opening question. Broadly, there are two ways 
the full name, date of birth and address and any to do this.
numerical identifier used by the local health system A single open-ended question along the lines of 
(in the UK, the hospital registration number or the ‘Tell me about what has led up to you coming here 
NHS number) today’ gives the opportunity for the patient to begin 

Pleasant surroundings are very important. It is with what he feels to be most important to him and 
essential that both patient and doctor feel at ease, avoids any prejudgement of issues or exclusion of 
and especially that neither feels threatened by the what at first hearing may seem less important. 
encounter. Avoid having patients full-face across a However, at this stage the patient may be very anxious 
desk. Note taking is important during consultations and nervous and still making his own assessment of 
while being able to see the patient and establish eye how he will react to the doctor as a person. A begin-
contact and to show sympathy and awareness of his ning which focuses on issues which may be more 
needs during the discussion of symptoms, much of factual and less emotive can be more rewarding and 
which may be distressing or even embarrassing. If lead to a more satisfactory consultation. Box 1.1 lists 
the doctor is right-handed and the patient sits on the some of the areas of questioning that can be usefully 
doctor’s left, at an angle to the desk, the situation is included at the beginning of the history. It is important 
less formal, and clues such as agitated foot and hand to inform the patient that this is going to be the 
movements are more evident. If other people are order of things so that he does not feel that his 
present, arrange the seating to make it clear that it pressing problems are being ignored. A statement 
is the patient who is the centre of attention rather along the lines of ‘Before we discuss why you have 
than any others present. Increasingly doctors are come today, I want to ask you some background 
entering information directly into a computer, rather questions’ should inform the patient satisfactorily.
than writing, and this affects positioning. There is a particular logic in taking the past medical 

history at this stage. For many conditions, the distinc-
tion as to what is a current problem and what is past 

Emergency presentations history is unclear and arbitrary in the patient’s mind. 
A patient presenting with an acute exacerbation of 

If the patient is being seen as an emergency, the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease may have a 
whole process of history taking is altered according history of respiratory problems going back many 
to the surroundings and the degree of illness. No years. Therefore, taking the history along a ‘timeline’ 
history may be obtainable from a severely ill or will often build up a much better picture of all of 
unconscious patient, but collateral history from the patient’s problems, how they have developed and 
bystanders, relatives or emergency medical personnel how they now interact with life and work.
should not be ignored. In retrospect this information Once these preliminaries have been completed, 
can be hard to get later on in the patient’s illness the doctor should use a simple and open-ended 
and can be crucial to diagnosis (e.g. was the patient question to encourage the patient to give a full and 
seen to have a grand mal seizure, or did he complain free account of the current issues. Say something 
of sudden pain, before a collapse). along the lines of ‘Tell me about what has led up to 

you coming here today’. This wording leaves as open 
as possible any question about the cause of the 

History taking
Having overcome the strangeness of meeting and 
talking to a wide variety of people that he might not Box 1.1  Areas of questioning that can be covered at the 
ordinarily meet, the new medical student usually beginning of history taking
feels that history taking ought to be fairly simple but 

■
that physical examination is full of pitfalls such as 	 Confirm date of birth and age

■
unrecognized heart murmurs and confusing parts of 	 Occupation and occupational history

■
the neurological examination. However, the experi- 	 Past medical history

■
enced doctor comes to realize that history taking is 	 Smoking

■
immensely skilled, and that the extent to which this 	 Alcohol consumption

■
skill goes on increasing with experience is probably 	 Drug and treatment history

■
greater than for clinical examination. 	 Family history



SECTION One
5

Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
patient’s problems and why he is seeing a doctor, and Box 1.2  Particular gestures useful in analysing specific 
could give rise to an initial answer beginning with pain symptoms
such varied phrases as ‘I have this pain …’, ‘I feel 
depressed …’, ‘I am extremely worried about …’, ‘I ■	 A squeezing gesture to describe cardiac pain
don’t know but my family doctor thought …’, ‘My ■	 Hand position to describe renal colic
wife insisted …’ or even ‘I thought you would already ■	 Rubbing the sternum to describe heartburn
know from the letter my family doctor wrote to you’. ■	 Rubbing the buttock and thigh to describe sciatica
All of these answers are perfectly valid but each gives ■	 Arms clenched around the abdomen to describe mid-gut 
a different clue as to what are the real issues for the colic
patient, and how to develop the history-taking process 
further for that individual.

This part of history taking is probably the most 
important and the most dependent on the skill of Box 1.3  Words and phrases that need clarification
the doctor. It is always tempting to interrupt too 
early and, once interrupted, the patient rarely com- Ordinary English words
pletes what he was intending to say. Even when he ■	 Diarrhoea
appears to have finished giving his reasons for the ■	 Constipation
consultation, always ask if there are any more broad ■	 Wind
areas that will need discussion before beginning to ■	 Indigestion
discuss each in more detail. ■	 Being sick

■	 Dizziness
■	 Headache

Developing themes ■	 Double vision
■

This stage of the history is likely to see the patient 	 Pins and needles
■

talking much more than the doctor, but it remains 	 Rash
■

vital for the doctor to steer and mould the process 	 Blister
so that the information gathered is complete, coherent Medical terms that may be used imprecisely by patients
and, if possible, logical. Some patients will present a ■	 Arthritis
clear, concise and chronologically perfect history with ■	 Sciatica
little prompting, although they are in the minority. ■	 Migraine
For most patients, the doctor will need to do a ■	 Fits
substantial amount of clarifying and summarizing ■	 Stroke
with statements such as ‘You mean that …’, ‘Can I ■	 Palpitation
go back to when …’, Can I check I have under ■	 Angina
stood …’, So up to that point you …’, ‘I am afraid I ■	 Heart attack
am not at all clear about …’ and ‘I really do not ■	 Diarrhoea
understand, can we go over that again?’ If a patient ■	 Constipation
clearly indicates that he does not wish to discuss ■	 Nausea
particular aspects of the history, then this wish must ■	 Piles/haemorrhoids
be respected and the diagnosis based on what informa- ■	 Anaemia
tion is available, although it is also important to ■	 Pleurisy
explain to the patient the limitations that may be ■	 Eczema
imposed by this lack of information. ■	 Urticaria

■	 Warts
Non-verbal communication ■	 Cystitis
Within any consultation, the non-verbal communica-
tion is as important as what the patient says. There 
may be contradictions such as a patient who does Vocabulary
not admit to any worries or anxieties but who clearly It is very important to use vocabulary that the patient 
looks as if he has many. Particular gestures during will understand and use appropriately. This under-
the description of pain symptoms can give vital clinical standing needs to be on two levels: he must understand 
clues (Box 1.2). While concentrating on the conversa- the basic words used, and his interpretation of those 
tion with the patient, the doctor should keep a wide words must be understood and clarified by the doctor. 
awareness of all other clues that can be gleaned from Box 1.3 lists words and phrases that may be used in 
the consultation. These include the patient’s demean- the consultation that the doctor needs to be very 
our, dress and appearance, any walking aids, the careful to clarify with the patient. If the patient uses 
interaction between the patient and any accompanying one of the ordinary English words listed, its meaning 
people and the way that the patient reacts to the must be clarified. A patient who says he is dizzy 
developing consultation. could be describing actual vertigo, but could just 



6 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
mean light-headedness or a feeling that he is going Box 1.4  Example of a history that leads to  
to faint. A patient who says that he has diarrhoea a poor conclusion
could mean liquid stools passed hourly throughout 
the day and night or could mean a couple of urgent A GP is seeing a 58-year-old man who is known to be 
soft stools passed first thing in the morning only. hypertensive and a smoker. The receptionist has already 
Therefore, the doctor needs to use words that are documented that he is coming in with a problem of chest 
almost certainly going to be clearly understood by pain. The GP makes an automatic assumption that the pain 
the patient, and the doctor must clarify any word or is most likely to be angina pectoris, because that is 
phrase that the patient uses to avoid any possibility probably the most serious cause and the one that the 
of ambiguity. patient is likely to be most worried about, and therefore 

starts taking the history with the specific purpose of 
Indirect and direct questions confirming or refuting that diagnosis.

GP: I gather you’ve had some chest pain?
Broadly, questions asked by the doctor can be divided 
into indirect or open-ended and direct or closed. Patient: Yes, it’s been quite bad.
Indirect or open-ended questions can be regarded as GP: Is it in the middle of your chest?
an invitation for the patient to talk about the general Patient: Yes.
area that the doctor indicates to be of interest. These GP: And does it travel to your left arm?
questions will often start with phrases like ‘Tell me Patient: Yes – and to my shoulder.
more about …’, ‘What do you think about …’, ‘How GP: Does it come on when you walk?
does that make you feel …’, ‘What happened Patient: Yes.
next …’ or ‘Is there anything else you would like to GP: And is it relieved by rest?
tell me?’ They inform the patient that the agenda is 
very much with him, that he can talk about whatever Patient: Yes – usually.
is important and that the doctor has not prejudged GP: I’m afraid I think this is angina and I will need to refer 
any issues. If skilfully used, and if the doctor is sensitive you to a heart specialist.
to the clues presented in the answers, a series of such The GP has only asked very direct and closed questions. 
questions should allow the doctor to understand the Each answer has begun with ‘Yes’. The patient has already 
issues that are most important from the patient’s been quite firmly tagged with a ‘label’ of angina, and 
point of view. The patient will also be allowed to anxiety has been raised by the specialist referral.
describe things in his own words. Alternatively, the GP keeps an open mind and starts as 

Many patients are in awe of doctors and have some follows:
conscious or subconscious need to please them and GP: Tell me why you have come to see me today.
go along with what they say. If the doctor prejudges Patient: Well – I have been having some chest pain.
the patient’s problems and tends to ‘railroad’ the GP: Tell me more about what it’s like.
conversation to fit their assumed diagnosis too early Patient: It’s in the centre of my chest and tends to go to 
in the process, then the patient can easily go along my left arm. Sometimes it comes on when I’ve been 
with this and give simple answers that do not fully walking.
describe his situation. Box 1.4 illustrates this extremely GP: Tell me more about that.
simple, common and important pitfall of history Patient: Sometimes it comes when I am walking and 
taking. sometimes when I’m sitting down at home after a long 

walk.
Disease-centred versus patient-centred GP: If the pain comes on when you are walking, what do 
An interview that uses lots of direct questions is often you do?
‘disease centred’, whereas a ‘patient centred’ interview Patient: I usually slow down, but if I’m in a hurry I can 
will contain enough open-ended questions for patients walk on with the pain.
to talk about all of their problems and be given GP: I am a little worried that this might be angina but 
enough time to do so. This will also help to avoid some things suggest it might not be, so I am going to refer 
the situation in which the doctor and the patient you to a heart specialist to make sure it isn’t angina.
have different agendas. There can often appear to be 
a conflict if the patient complains of symptoms that The GP has asked questions which are either completely 
are probably not medically serious, such as tension open-ended or leave the patient free to describe exactly 
headache, while the doctor is focusing on some what happens within a directed area of interest. Clarifying 
potentially serious but relatively asymptomatic condi- questions have been used. While being reassuring, the GP 
tion, such as anaemia or hypertension. In this situation, expresses some concern about angina and is clear about 
a patient-centred approach will allow the patient to the exact reason for the specialist referral (for clarification).
air all of his problems and will allow a skilled doctor 
to educate the patient as to why the other issues are 
also important and must not be ignored. A GP may 
rightly refuse a demand for antibiotics for a sore 



SECTION One
7

Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
throat that is likely to be viral but should use the many women will be the pain of labour. The pain 
opportunity to educate and inform the patient about scale assessment is useful in diagnosis and in monitor-
the true place of antibiotic treatment and the risks ing disease, treatment and analgesia. Assessing a patient 
of excess and inappropriate use. The doctor needs to with pain is discussed in more detail in Chapter 11.
grasp the difference between the disease framework 
(what the diagnosis is) and the illness framework Which issues are important?
(what are the patient’s experiences, ideas, expectations A problem for those doctors wishing to take the 
and feelings) and to be able to apply both frameworks history in chronological order – ‘Start at the beginning 
to a clinical situation, varying the degree of each, and tell me all about it’ – is that people usually start 
according to the differing demands. with the part of the problem that they regard as the 

most important. This is, of course, entirely valid from 
Judging the severity of symptoms the patient’s viewpoint, and it is also important to 
Many symptoms are subjective and the degree of the doctor, since the issue that most bothers the 
severity expressed by the patient will depend on his patient is then brought to attention. Curing disease 
own personal reaction and also on how the symptoms may not always be possible, so it is important to be 
interact with his life. A tiny alteration in the neurologi- aware of the important symptoms since, for example, 
cal function of the hands and fingers will make a pain may be relieved even though the underlying 
huge impression on a professional musician, whereas cause of the pain is still present. It is very common 
most others might hardly notice the same dysfunction. for the doctor to be pleased that one condition has 
A mild skin complaint might be devastating for a been solved, but the patient still complains of the 
professional model but cause little worry in others. main symptom that he originally came with.

Trying to assess how the symptoms interact with 
the patient’s life is an important skill of history taking. A schematic history
A simple question such as ‘How much does this 
bother you?’ might suffice. It may be helpful to ask A suggested schematic history is detailed in Box 1.6. 
specific questions about how the patient’s daily life There will be many clinical situations in which it 
is affected, with comparison to events that many will be clear that a different scheme should be fol-
patients will experience. Box 1.5 illustrates some of lowed. An important part of learning about history 
the relevant areas. taking is that each doctor develops his own personal 

Medical symptomatology often involves pain, which scheme that works for him in the situations that he 
is more subjective than almost anything else. Many generally comes across. Nevertheless, it is useful to 
patients are stoical and bear severe pain uncomplain- start with a basic outline in mind.
ingly whereas others seem to complain much more 
about apparently less severe pain. A simple pain scale Direct questions about bodily systems
can be very helpful in assessing the severity of pain. Within the variety of disease processes that may 
The patient is asked to rate his pain on a scale from present to doctors, many have features that occur in 
1 to 10, with 1 being a pain that is barely noticeable many of the bodily systems which at first may not 
and 10 the worst pain he can imagine or the worst seem to be related to the patient’s main complaint. 
pain he has ever experienced. It is also useful to A patient presenting with back pain may have had 
clarify what the reference point is for ‘10’, which for 

Box 1.6  Suggested scheme for basic history taking
■

Box 1.5  Areas of everyday life that can be used as a 	 Name, age, occupation, country of birth, other 
reference for the severity, importance or clarification of identity

■
clarification of symptoms 	 Main presenting problem

■	 Past medical history – ‘Before we talk about why you 
Exercise tolerance: ‘How far can you walk on the flat going have come, I need to ask you to tell me about any 
at your own speed?’, ‘Can you climb one flight of stairs serious medical problems that you have had in the 
slowly without stopping?’, ‘Can you still do simple whole of your life’
housework such as vacuum cleaning or making a bed?’ ■	 Specific past medical history – e.g. diabetes, jaundice, 

Work: ‘Has this problem kept you off work?’, ‘Why exactly TB, heart disease, high blood pressure, rheumatic fever, 
have you not been able to work?’ epilepsy

Sport: ‘Do you play regular sport and has this been ■	 History of main presenting complaint
affected?’ ■	 Family history

Eating: ‘Has this affected your eating?’, ‘Do any ■	 Occupational history
particular foods cause trouble?’ ■	 Smoking, alcohol, allergies

Social life: ‘What do you do in your spare time and has ■	 Drug and other treatment history
this been restricted in any way?’, ‘Has your sex life been ■	 Direct questions about bodily systems not covered by the 
affected?’ presenting complaint



8 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
some haematuria from a renal cell carcinoma that Box 1.7  Bodily systems and questions relevant to taking 
has spread and is the cause of the presenting symptom. a full history from most patients. If the specific 
For this reason, any thorough assessment of a patient questions have been covered by the history of the 
must include questions about all the bodily systems presenting complaint, they do not need to be 
and not just areas that the patient perceives as included again. If the answers are positive, the 
problematic. This area of questioning should be characteristics of each must be clarified
introduced with a statement such as ‘I am now going 
to ask you about other possible symptoms that could Cardiorespiratory
be important and relevant to your problem’. A list ■	 Chest pain
of such question areas is given in Box 1.7. ■	 Intermittent claudication

In addition, during any medical consultation, ■	 Palpitation
however brief, it is the duty of the doctor to be alert ■	 Ankle swelling
to all aspects of the patient’s health and not just the ■	 Orthopnoea
area or problem that he has presented with. For ■	 Nocturnal dyspnoea
example, a GP would not ignore a high blood pressure ■	 Shortness of breath
reading in a patient presenting with a rash, even ■	 Cough with or without sputum
though the two are probably not connected. This ■	 Haemoptysis
function of any consultation can be regarded as Gastrointestinal
‘screening’ the patient. In health economic terms, a 

■
true screening programme for a particular disease 	 Abdominal pain

■
across a whole population (such as for cervical cancer) 	 Dyspepsia

■
has to be evaluated as being useful, economic and 	 Dysphagia

■
with no negative effects. However, once the patient 	 Nausea and/or vomiting

■
with a complaint has attended a doctor, a simple 	 Degree of appetite

■
screening process can be incorporated into the 	 Weight loss or gain

■
consultation with little extra time or effort. The direct 	 Bowel pattern and any change

■
questions (and full routine examination) encompass 	 Rectal bleeding

■
this screening function as well as contributing to 	 Jaundice

solving the patient’s presenting problems. Genitourinary
■	 Haematuria

Clarifying detail ■	 Nocturia
■	 Frequency

One of the basic principles of history taking is not ■	 Dysuria
to take what the patient says at face value but to ■	 Menstrual irregularity – women
clarify it as much as possible. Almost all of the history ■	 Urethral discharge – men
will involve clarification but there are specific areas Locomotor
where this is particularly important.

■	 Joint pain
Pain ■	 Change in mobility
Whenever a patient complains of pain, there should Neurological
follow a series of clarifying questions as listed in Box ■	 Seizures
1.8. Of all symptoms, pain is perhaps the most subjec- ■	 Collapses
tive and the hardest for the doctor to truly compre- ■	 Dizziness
hend. A simple pain scale has been described above. ■	 Eyesight
The other characteristics are vital in analysing what ■	 Hearing
might be the cause of pain. Some painful conditions ■	 Transient loss of function (vision, speech, sight)
have classic sites for the pain and the radiation ■	 Paraesthesia
(myocardial ischaemia is classically felt in the centre 
of the chest radiating to the left arm). Pain from a 
hollow organ is classically colicky (such as biliary or 
renal colic). The pain of a subarachnoid haemorrhage Box 1.8  List of clarifications for a complaint of pain
is classically very sudden, ‘like a hammer blow to the 

■	 Site
head’. Some pains have clear aggravating or relieving 

■	 Radiation
factors (peptic ulcer pain is classically worse when 

■	 Character
hungry and better after food). Colicky right upper 

■	 Severity
quadrant abdominal pain accompanied by jaundice 

■	 Time course
suggests a gallstone obstructing the bile duct, and a 

■	 Aggravating factors
headache accompanied by preceding flashing lights 

■	 Relieving factors
suggests migraine. It is always worth making sure that 

■	 Associated symptoms
any symptom of pain has been clarified in this way, 



SECTION One
9

Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking

Box 1.9  Clarifying questions in the drug history Box 1.10  Detail of the family history
■	 Can you tell me all the drugs or medicines that you Are there any illnesses that run in your family?

take? Occasionally this will reveal major genetic trends such as 
■	 Have any been prescribed from another clinic, doctor or haemophilia. More often there will be an answer such as 

dentist? ‘They all have heart trouble’.
■	 Do you buy any yourself from a pharmacy? Basic family tree of first-degree relatives
■	 Are you sure you have told me about all tablets, 

capsules and liquid medicines? This should be plotted on a diagram for most patients, 
including major illnesses and cause and age of any deaths.

■	 What about inhalers, skin creams or patches, 
suppositories or tablets to suck? Specific questions about occurrence of problems similar to 

■	 Were you taking any medicines a little while ago but the patient’s
stopped recently? Ask the patient about items in the developing differential 

■	 Do you ever take any medicines prescribed for other diagnosis, for example ‘Does any one in your family have 
people such as your spouse? gallstones/epilepsy/high blood pressure?’ if these seem a 

■	 Do you use herbal or other complementary medicines? likely diagnosis for the patient under consideration.

and while some of the points will come out in the toxic exposures, are now extremely rare in developed 
open-ended part of the history taking, others will industrial countries, but accidental exposure continues 
need specific questions. to occur. Other problems, such as asbestosis or silicosis, 

produce effects many years after exposure, and a 
Drug history careful chronological occupational history may be 
At first glance, asking a patient what drugs he is required to elucidate the exposure. For patients with 
taking would seem to be one of the simplest and non-organic problems, the work environment can 
most reliable parts of taking a history. In practice, often be the trigger for the development of the 
this could not be further from the truth, and there problem.
are many pitfalls for the inexperienced. This is partly 
because many patients are not very knowledgeable Alcohol history
about their own medications and also because patients The detrimental effects of alcohol on health cause a 
often misinterpret the question, giving a very narrow variety of problems, and the frequency of excess 
answer when the doctor wants to know about medica- alcohol use means that up to 10% of adult hospital 
tions in the widest sense. The need for clarification inpatients have a problem related to alcohol. To make 
in the drug history is given in Box 1.9. The drug an accurate estimate of alcohol consumption and any 
history, almost more than any other, benefits from possible dependency, it is essential to enquire carefully 
being repeated at another time and in a slightly and not to take what the patient says at face value 
different way. For example, in trying to define a but to probe the history in different ways (Box 1.11). 
possible drug reaction as a cause of liver dysfunction, For documentation, the reported amount should then 
it is not unusual to find that the patient has taken a be converted into units of alcohol per week (Box 
few relevant tablets (such as over-the-counter non- 1.12). If the reported amount seems at all excessive 
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) just before the then an assessment should be made of possible 
onset of the problem and only remembered or realized dependency for which the CAGE questions are very 
it was important to say so when asked repeatedly useful (Box 1.13).
and in great detail.

Retrospective history
Family history The concept of retrospective history taking is a 
Like the drug history, the family history would seem refinement of taking the past medical history and 
at first glance to be simple and reliably quoted. In develops the theme of never taking what the patient 
general this is true, but it can be dissected into sections says at face value. Many patients will clearly say that 
that will uncover more information. These are set they have had certain illnesses or previous symptoms 
out in Box 1.10. using medical terminology. This information may not 

be accurate either because the patient has misinter-
Occupational history preted it or because they were given the wrong 
It is always useful to know the patient’s occupation information or diagnosis in the first place. This area 
if he has one, as it is such an important part of life becomes particularly important if any new diagnosis 
and one with which any illness is bound to interact. is going to rely on this type of information. For 
In some situations, a patient’s occupation will be instance, in assessing a patient presenting with chest 
directly relevant to the diagnostic process. The classic pain at rest, a past history of angina of effort will be 
industrial illnesses, such as lead poisoning and other considered a risk factor for acute myocardial infarction 



10 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking

Box 1.11  Probing the alcohol history period of heavy work and not a clear central chest 
pain coming on during exertion.

Doctor: Do you drink any alcoholic drinks? Clearly the possibility of retaking the history for 
Patient: Oh yes, but not much – just socially. everything the patient says about his medical past 
Doctor: Do you drink some every day? may not be practical in the time available, but the 
Patient: Yes. possibility and value of doing this should always be 
Doctor: Tell me what you drink. borne in mind and can completely alter the developing 

differential diagnosis.
Patient: I usually have two pints of beer at lunchtime and 
two or three on my way home from work. Particular situations
Doctor: And at the weekend?
Patient: I usually go out Saturday nights and have four or It is true to say that while there are many themes, 
five pints. patterns and common areas to history taking and 
Doctor: Do you drink anything other than beer? some areas of history taking might seem routine, the 
Patient: On Saturdays I have a double whisky with each process of history taking for different patients will 
pint. never be identical. There are some particular and 

often challenging situations that deserve some further 
The first answer does not suggest a problem, but based description.

on the figures in Box 1.12, the actual amount adds up to 
70 units per week which clearly confers considerable health Garrulous patients
risks to this patient.

A new medical student will soon meet a patient who 
says a huge amount without really revealing any of 
the information that goes towards a useful medical 

Box 1.12  Units of alcohol (1 unit contains 10 g of pure history. This will be in marked contrast to some other 
alcohol) patients who, from the first introductory question 

The units of alcohol can be determined by multiplying the (e.g. ‘Tell me about what has led up to you coming 
volume of the drink (in ml) by its % alcohol by volume here today’), will reveal a perfect history with virtually 
(abv) and dividing this by 1000. For example, 1 pint no prompting. A fictitious but typical history from 
(568 ml) of beer at 3.5% abv contains: (568 × 3.5) / 1000 the former type of patient is given in Box 1.14. When 
= 1.988 units. faced with such a patient, the doctor will need to 

It is important to bear in mind that alcohol strength significantly alter the balance of open-ended and 
varies widely within each category of drink, but here is a direct questions. Open-ended questions will tend to 
guide to the most common alcoholic drinks: lead to such a patient giving a long recitation but 
■	 Standard-strength beer (3.5% abv): 1 pint = 2 units with little useful content. The doctor will have to 
■	 Very strong lagers (6% abv): 1 pint = 3.5 units use many more clear, direct questions which may 
■	 Spirits (whisky, gin, etc., 40% abv): 1 UK pub measure just have yes/no answers. The overall history will 

(about 25 ml) = 1 unit inevitably be less satisfactory but it is not possible 
■	 Wine (12%): 1 standard glass (175 ml) = 2 units to get the ‘perfect’ history in every patient.

The UK Government now recommends that to minimize Angry patients
alcohol-related health effects, both men and women should 
keep to less than 14 units of alcohol per week. Only a few patients are overtly angry when they see 

a doctor, but anger expressed during a clinical consulta-
tion may be an important diagnostic clue while at 
the same time get in the way of a smooth diagnostic 

Box 1.13  The CAGE assessment for alcohol dependency process. Some patients will be angry with the immedi-
■	 C – Have you ever felt the need to Cut down your alcohol ate circumstances such as a late-running outpatient 

consumption? clinic. Others will have longer-term anger against the 
■	 A – Have you ever felt Angry at others criticizing your surgery, department or institution which will be more 

drinking? difficult to address. It is always important to acknowl-
■	 G – Do you ever feel Guilty about excess drinking? edge anger and to try to tease out what underlies it. 
■	 E – Do you ever drink in the mornings (Eye-opener)? Even if it is not the doctor’s immediate fault that 

Two or more positive answers could indicate a problem of the clinic is running late or there have been other 
dependency. problems, it is always worth apologizing on behalf 

of the unit or institution.
For some patients, anger may be part of the symp-

and will increase the likelihood of that as the current tomatology or expressed as a reaction to the diagnosis 
diagnosis. However, on closer questioning, it might or treatment. This will be particularly true in patients 
become clear that what the patient was told was with a non-organic diagnosis who insist that there is 
angina (perhaps by a relative and not even a doctor) ‘something wrong’ and that the doctor must do 
was in fact a vague chest ache coming on after a something. Many types of presentation will fall into 



SECTION One
11

Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking

Box 1.14  A typical ‘garrulous’ history of a doctor to give the patient as much information 
about his illness as possible, particularly so that he 

Doctor: Tell me about what has led up to you coming here is able to make informed choices about treatments. 
today. This change of approach has led to many patients 
Patient: Well doctor, you see, it was like this. I woke up one seeking out information about their problems from 
day last week – I am not quite sure which day it was – it many other sources, particularly the Internet. It is 
might have been Tuesday – or, no, I remember it was not unusual for a patient to come into the first 
Monday because my son came round later to visit – he consultation with a new doctor, armed with printouts 
always comes on a Monday because that’s his day off from various websites that he feels are relevant or 
college – he’s studying law – I’m so pleased that he’s information on their smart phone.
settled down to that – he was so wild when he was younger The doctor must take all this in their stride, go 
– do you know what he did once …? through the information with the patient and help 
Doctor (interrupting): Can you tell me what did happen him by showing what is relevant and what is not. 
when you woke up last Monday? Many medical websites are created by individuals or 
Patient: Oh yes – it was like this – I am not sure what groups without proper information for a sound basis 
woke me up – it may have been the pain – no, more likely of knowledge, but it can be difficult for the patient 
it was the dustmen collecting the rubbish – they do come to make a judgement about this. Being able to inform 
so early and make such a noise – that day it was even patients of a few relevant and reliable websites can 
worse because their usual dustcart must have been broken be very helpful. In general, it is easy and more reward-
and they came with this really old noisy one … ing to look after well-informed patients, provided 
Doctor (interrupting): So you had some pain when you they do not fall into the very small group that have 
woke up then? such fixed and erroneous ideas about their problems 

that the diagnostic and treatment process is impeded.
Patient: Yes – I think it must have been there when I woke 
up because I lay in bed wondering where on earth there 
might be some indigestion remedy – I knew I had some  Accompanying persons
but I am one of those people who can never remember Some people come to consultations alone and others 
where things are – do you know what I managed to lose with one or more friends or family members. Always 
last year …? spend time during the initial exchange of greetings 
Doctor (interrupting): Was the pain burning or crushing? identifying who is present and getting some idea of 
Patient: Well, that depends on what you mean by … the group dynamics. If the patient appears to be 
Doctor (interrupting): Yes, but did you have any crushing alone, ask whether there is someone waiting outside. 
pain? There is always a reason people come accompanied, 

The doctor gradually changes from very open-ended to but if there appear to be too many people present 
very closed questions in order to try to get some information or if the presence of others might threaten the 
that is useful to building up the diagnostic picture relationship with the patient at any time in the 
– eventually a question is asked that just has a yes/no consultation, it is appropriate to consider asking 
answer. the others to leave, even if only briefly. It is reasonable, 

if in doubt, to ascertain why others wish to be present, 
and certainly whether this is also the patient’s wish. 
It is very important to be certain that the patient is 

this group, including tension headache, irritable bowel happy for any others to be present and to be as 
and back pain. There may be obvious secondary gain certain as possible that the patient does not wish to 
for the patient (such as staying off work and claiming object but feels unable to do so. This is particularly 
benefits) and challenging this pattern of behaviour difficult if the doctor does not speak the patient’s 
may provoke anger. language but can speak to those accompanying. 

It is the duty of a doctor to attempt to work with Consider whether specific questions about the history 
and help a wide variety of patients, and those who should be asked of those accompanying, either with 
are angry are no exception. However, occasionally it the patient or separately, with specific consent.
may be best to acknowledge that the doctor–patient Beware of a situation in which the accompanying 
relationship has broken down and that facilitating a people answer all the questions, even if there is not 
change to another doctor may be in the best interests a language difficulty. Many clues to diagnosis may be 
of the patient. masked if direct communication with the patient is 

not possible (using an interpreter/advocate for patients 
The well-informed patient who do not speak the same language as the doctor 
In the last century, doctors often looked after patients is discussed below). There may be many reasons that 
for a long time without really explaining their illness the patient does not speak for himself. These may 
to them, and patients were reasonably happy taking include embarrassment in front of those accompanying 
the attitude that ‘the doctor knows best’. This (such as a teenager with his parents). In such cir-
approach is no longer acceptable and it is the duty cumstances, it may be necessary to leave parts of the 



12 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
history until those accompanying can reasonably be myriad data gleaned on taking a history, he is often 
asked to leave, such as during the examination. baffled as to how to start the analysis, but inevitably 
Occasionally it is clear that the patient will not talk the process becomes easier as more medical knowledge 
for himself, in which case the history from those is acquired. An analysis of symptoms from a medical 
accompanying will have to be the working student is more based on facts learned from textbooks, 
information. whereas an experienced doctor will tend to base the 

analysis more on patterns of disease presentation that 
Using interpreters/advocates they have encountered many times. While the analyti-
Particularly in the inner cities of Western countries, cal process is largely acquired through this type of 
there will often be a large immigrant population who experience, some principles can be described. This 
do not speak the first language of the country, even topic is discussed further in Chapter 3.
if they have been resident for some years, and it is 
impractical for each patient to be looked after by ‘Hard and soft’ symptoms
health professionals who speak their language. In 
these circumstances, the medical consultation has to A detective analysing evidence of a crime will put a 
be undertaken with an interpreter. The most immedi- lot of weight on fingerprint or DNA evidence and 
ate solution may be to use a family member, but if less weight on identification evidence. The same 
the issues are private or embarrassing, this often does principles apply to analysing symptoms. A ‘hard’ 
not work well. It is also unethical to use an underage symptom can be thought of as one which, if clearly 
family member as an interpreter (under 16). present, adds a lot of weight to a particular diagnosis. 

The best solution is to have available an independent A ‘soft’ symptom may be thought of as one which 
interpreter/advocate for the consultation, although is either reported by patients so variably that its true 
in areas where many patients are not native speakers, presence is often in doubt, or one which is present 
many interpreters will be needed for a range of in such a variety of conditions as to not be useful in 
languages. Another solution for infrequently encoun- confirming or refuting a diagnosis. Examples of these 
tered languages is a telephone interpreting service. two groupings are given in Box 1.15.

When taking a history via an interpreter/advocate, 
the overall style usually has to change. The breadth Time course
of history and the clinical clues that can be obtained A simple epithet states that the character of the 
from a good initial open-ended question may well symptom suggests the ‘anatomy’ of the problem and 
be lost in the double translation, and the doctor often the time course the ‘pathology’ of it. For instance, a 
changes to a much more direct style of questioning vascular event such as a myocardial infarct, stroke or 
for which the answers will be unambiguous even subarachnoid haemorrhage usually has a sudden onset, 
when going through the double translation. It is also whereas something that gradually progresses or for 
not unusual for the interpreter/advocate and the 
patient to have a few minutes of conversation fol-
lowing an apparently simple question from the doctor, Box 1.15  ‘Hard’ and ‘soft’ symptoms
but then a very short answer is returned to the doctor. 
This leaves the doctor bemused as to what is really ‘Hard’ symptoms
going on with the patient. Finally, history taking via ■	 Pneumaturia: almost always due to a colovesical fistula
an interpreter/advocate usually takes much longer ■	 Fortification spectra: if associated with unilateral 
than when the doctor and the patient speak the same headache, strongly suggests classical migraine
language. ■	 Rigors: strongly suggests bacteraemia, viraemia or 

malaria
■	 A bitten tongue: if associated with a seizure, strongly 

Analysing symptoms suggests a grand mal fit
■	 A sudden severe headache ‘like a hammer blow’: 

The objective of the history and examination is to strongly suggests a subarachnoid haemorrhage
begin identifying the disturbance of function and ■	 Pleuritic chest pain: strongly suggests pleural irritation 
structure responsible for the patient’s symptoms. This due to infection or a pulmonary embolus
is done by analysis of the symptoms and signs leading ■	 Itching: if associated with jaundice, indicates intra- or 
to a differential diagnosis (a list of possible diagnoses extrahepatic cholestasis
that will account for the symptoms and signs, usually ‘Soft’ symptoms
set out in descending order of likelihood). This list of 

■
possibilities is then often refined by the use of special 	 Dizziness

■
investigations, but in up to 80% of patients the likely 	 Light-headedness

■
diagnosis is reasonably clear after the initial history. 	 Tiredness

■
The process of analysis can be likened to detective 	 Back pain

■
work, in which the symptoms and signs are the evi- 	 Headache

■
dence. When a medical student is first faced with the 	 Wind



SECTION One
13

Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
which the onset cannot be exactly dated by the Box 1.16  General reasons that patients come to see 
patient, such as weight loss or dysphagia, may be a doctors (other than for a severe or acute 
malignant process. There are some pitfalls in this type problem)
of analysis which must be borne in mind to avoid 
confusion. ■	 Cannot tolerate ongoing symptoms and wants to be rid 

Disease processes that gradually progress may start of them
off by being asymptomatic and the patient may only ■	 Someone else noticing specific problems (e.g. jaundice)
notice symptoms when they start to interfere with ■	 Another doctor noticing specific problems (e.g. high 
his lifestyle and activities. For example, exertional blood pressure)
breathlessness in a largely sedentary patient may ■	 Worry about underlying diagnosis (often induced by 
develop late in a cardiorespiratory disease process, relatives, friends, books, media or Internet)
whereas a patient who actively exercises is likely to ■	 Spouse or relative worried about patient
notice symptoms much earlier. This phenomenon is ■	 Cannot work with symptoms
also seen where the relevant bodily organ or system ■	 Colleagues/bosses complaining about patient’s work or 
has a lot of reserve and the symptom may show itself time off
only when the reserve is used up. This could be true ■	 Requirement of others (insurance, employment benefit, 
for a relatively chronic liver disease such as primary litigation)
biliary cirrhosis apparently presenting acutely. The 
proverb of the ‘straw that broke the camel’s back’ 
is a good analogy of this sort of situation (a camel presenting complaint is exertional chest pain can 
is steadily loaded up with straw until suddenly it immediately be asked if the pain is worse on increased 
appears that a single piece of straw is sufficient to exertion and how long a period of rest is needed to 
make the camel collapse). In addition, the disease relieve it. Pain that is not predictably produced by 
process may have a step-wise worsening rather than a exertion and is not reliably relieved by rest may well 
linear decline, such as in a situation of multiple small not be angina pectoris. However, it remains very 
strokes when the patient may not present until a single important that interjected questions of this type do 
small stroke makes a big difference to his functional not spoil the flow of the patient’s story.
ability.

Pattern recognition versus logical analysis What does the patient actually want?
It is important to realize that in some clinical situ- If a patient comes to a doctor with a long history, it 
ations the diagnosis may be clear based on previ- is always worth trying to find out why he has come 
ous experience, and in others the diagnosis has to for medical help and what he actually wants from 
be built up through a process of logical analysis the consultation. There may be various scenarios as 
of symptoms, signs and special investigations. The listed in Box 1.16. It is always worth trying to find 
fact that the process of gaining information from out which might apply to the individual patient, 
symptoms, signs and special investigations is never because it sets the scene for giving advice and treat-
completely exact must also be borne in mind so ment, particularly if an exact diagnosis or a complete 
that the patient with an atypical presentation is not treatment cannot be provided. It is often much easier 
assigned the wrong diagnosis. The area of medicine to reassure a patient that there is nothing seriously 
that probably most often uses pattern recognition wrong than to give him an exact diagnosis or fully 
is dermatology, but recently skin biopsies are used relieve his symptoms.
much more to clarify diagnoses that were previously 
assumed. A patient presenting with chest pain and 
signs of underperfusion may easily be thought to be Retaking the history
having a myocardial infarction but a brief history of 
the character of the pain (tearing and going through to It is clear that history taking is an inexact process, 
the back) may prompt a search for a dissecting aortic heavily influenced by the doctor and by the patient. 
aneurysm. The logical conclusion of this is that no two histories 

taken from the same patient about the same set of 
Negative data symptoms will be identical, even if the same doctor 

repeats the process. Given two slightly or significantly 
An experienced history taker will begin the analysis different histories, it may be hard to know on which 
from the outset of the clinical encounter. This means one to base the diagnosis, or whether to regard history 
that during the initial process and without the need taking for that patient as so unreliable as to be useless. 
for so much later review, questions can be asked for The main message is that a single attempt at the 
which a negative answer is as important as a positive history may not suffice and repeated histories taken 
one. These questions are usually very specific and at different times by different people and in different 
direct, often with a yes/no answer. A patient whose ways may provide just as much extra information on 



14 1 Doctor and patient: General principles of history taking
which to base a diagnosis as more and more detailed Box 1.17  Duties of doctors registered with the UK General 
special investigations. When a patient is seen for a Medical Council (2013)
second or alternative opinion, the doctor usually 
spends more time on retaking the history than on Knowledge, skills and performance
repeating the examination. ■	 Make the care of your patient your first concern

■	 Keep your professional knowledge and skills up to date
■	 Recognize and work within the limits of your competence

Note taking Safety and quality
■

When making notes, it is important to keep eye 	 Take prompt action if you think that patient safety, 
contact with the patient. Notes should not be made dignity or comfort is being compromised.
only at times that might suggest to the patient what Communication, partnership and teamwork
items of information are regarded as important. It is ■	 Protect and promote the health of patients and the 
better to listen carefully and just record enough to public
help remember the important points later. A fuller ■	 Treat patients politely and considerately
account can be written up afterwards or dictated for ■	 Respect patients’ right to confidentiality
typing later. In this, the exact history, the weight ■	 Listen to, and respond to, patients’ concerns and 
placed on various items and, most importantly, what preferences
the patient actually said can be recorded. What ■	 Give patients the information they want or need in a 
patients say, word for word, is often as important as way they can understand
any later reconstruction of the history. Increasingly ■	 Respect patients’ right to reach decisions with you 
doctors are entering information directly into comput- about their treatment and care
ers, rather than writing, during a consultation. If an ■	 Support patients in caring for themselves to improve 
experienced doctor starts this for the first time, it and maintain their health
can feel intrusive, but can soon be mastered so as to Maintaining trust
become second nature. Patients will generally accept 

■
the presence of the computer as being part of the 	 Be honest and open and act with integrity

■
fabric of modern life. 	 Never discriminate unfairly against patients or colleagues

■	 Never abuse your patients’ trust in you or the public’s 
trust in the medical profession

■

Conclusion 	 You are personally accountable for your professional 
practice and must always be prepared to justify your 

History taking is the cornerstone of medical practice. decisions and actions
It combines considerable interpersonal skill and 
diversity with the need for logical thought based 
on a wealth of medical knowledge and represents history taking. Taking a detailed history while getting 
the beginning of treating and caring for patients to know a patient and arriving at a likely diagnosis 
in the widest sense. Almost all the attributes of is as rewarding in itself as performing a technical 
good medical practice as set out by the UK General procedure for a patient or seeing him get better in 
Medical Council (Box 1.17) are encompassed in good the end.



SECTION ONE
GENERAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT

General patient examination and 
differential diagnosis 2 

William M. Drake and Tahseen A. Chowdhury

Introduction A thorough examination requires the patient to 
be adequately exposed. Patients should be asked to 

The separation of the history from the examination undress completely or at least to their underclothes 
is artificial as the latter starts with the first greeting and then to cover themselves with a sheet or an 
and ends when the patient departs. There may be examination gown. If the patient keeps his under-
physical findings that prompt further questioning; clothes on, do not forget to examine the covered 
do not be concerned that your history taking was areas (buttocks, breasts, genitalia, perineum). Ideally 
inadequate, but revisit these areas at the conclusion a chaperone should be present when a male doctor 
of the examination or during it. From the outset, the examines a female patient and is essential for intimate 
clinician is assimilating potentially relevant information examinations such as rectal, vaginal and breast 
from the patient’s posture, appearance, speech, examinations. This is to reassure the patient and to 
demeanour and response to questions. Who is this protect the doctor from subsequent accusations of 
patient? What kind of person is he? What are his impropriety. Although the patient’s attendance at a 
anxieties? What is the reason for consulting a doctor consultation suggests he is happy to be examined, 
at this time? In the outpatient setting, note the this may not be the case and it is always courteous 
patient’s grooming and appropriateness of dress. If to ask permission. Check he is able to prepare for 
the patient is in hospital, are there outward signs of the examination by disrobing and mounting the couch 
social support, such as get-well cards or indicators unaided. Do not embarrass him by waiting for him 
of a religious faith? to fail and ask for help.

For most patients, start the examination on the 
right of the bed/couch with the patient semi-

General examination of a patient recumbent (approximately 45°). Do not dent the 
confidence of an already anxious patient with heart 

Many patients are apprehensive about being examined; failure or peritonitis by moving him unnecessarily 
the environment is unfamiliar, they may feel exposed from the position he finds most comfortable. From 
and are likely to have anxieties about the findings. the right-hand side of the patient, it is easier to 
Be open about your status as a medical student or examine the jugular veins, apex beat and abdominal 
junior doctor. Reassure the patient that the extra viscera, although left-handed students will take longer 
length of time you take to complete your examination to master this approach. Try to expose only the area 
compared to someone more senior is because you you are examining at the time. With practice, you 
are less experienced and that it does not necessarily will become adept at using the gown or drape to 
imply the findings are worrying. Many students, early cover the body part just examined as you proceed 
in their training, are anxious about touching and to the next. Regular attention to the patient’s comfort, 
examining patients. Persevere, as with practice and such as adjustment/replacement of pillows, helps 
experience, confidence will quickly come. strengthen the professional bond and reassures him 

The examination should be conducted in a warm, that you are concerned about his welfare.
private, quiet area. Daylight is preferable to artificial Quickly make a global assessment of the severity 
light, which may make the recognition of subtle of the patient’s illness. Ask yourself: ‘Does this person 
changes in skin colour (e.g. mild jaundice) difficult. look well, mildly ill or severely ill?’ If the patient is 
A cold room increases anxiety levels and shivering severely ill then it is appropriate to postpone a detailed 
muscle generates strange noises on auscultation of examination until the acute situation has been 
the chest. In hospital, you may need to ask neighbour- attended to. Do not put severely ill patients to 
ing patients to turn down the volume on their televi- inconvenience or distress that is not essential at that 
sion or radio. moment.



16 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Posture and gait Box 2.1  Body mass index
In the outpatient or primary care setting, observe BMI = weight (kg)/height (m)2

your patient from the moment you meet him in the In Europeans:
waiting area. Does he rise easily from a chair? Does ■	 Normal BMI: 20-25
he walk freely, stiffly or with a limp; confidently or ■	 Overweight: 25.1-30
apparently fearful of falling; aided or unaided? In the ■	 Obese: 30.1-35
hospital setting, note the patient’s posture in bed. ■	 Grossly obese: >35.1
Healthy people adjust their position at will, without In Asians:
difficulty. In disease, this ability is lost to variable 

■	 Normal BMI: 18-23
degrees, and severely ill patients may be sufficiently 

■	 Overweight: 23.1-28
helpless that they adopt positions that are very 

■	 Obese: 28.1-33
uncomfortable. Patients with left heart failure typically 

■	 Grossly obese: >33.1
find that lying horizontally worsens their sense of 
breathlessness (orthopnoea). The pain of peritonitis 
typically compels patients to lie supine, sometimes 
with the legs drawn up, still and quiet, with shallow 
breathing movements in order to minimise the pain 
that movement induces. This contrasts with the 
restlessness of renal colic, in which the patient often 
rolls around in a futile attempt to find a position free 
from pain. With acute inflammatory or infective joint 
disease, the affected limbs often lie motionless. In 
severe cases of meningitis, the neck may bend back-
wards and appear to burrow into the pillow.

Speech and interaction
Much information comes out of the first interaction. 
The face, particularly the eyes, indicate real feelings 
better than words. Did your patient smile when you 
introduced yourself? Was it symmetrical or was there 
obvious facial weakness? Did he make eye contact? 
Was the face animated or expressionless as in Par-
kinson’s disease? Was the voice hoarse due to laryngeal 
disease, recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy or myxoedema? 
Was the speech pressured, as in thyrotoxicosis or 
mania or monotonous and expressionless as in severe 
depression? Was it slurred from cerebellar disease or 
a previous stroke? Figure 2.1  Atrophic glossitis in a patient with severe vitamin 

B12 deficiency. There is also angular stomatitis from severe iron 

Physique and nutrition deficiency. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of 
Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind 

The nutritional state of a patient may provide an permission.)
important indicator of disease, and prompt correction 
of a deficient nutritional state may improve recovery. 
The more detailed methodologies available for without papillae (atrophic glossitis, Fig. 2.1) suggests 
nutritional assessment and management in the context important vitamin B deficiencies. Angular stomatitis 
of complex gastrointestinal disease are covered in (cheilosis, a softening of the skin at the angles of the 
Chapter 14. In the general survey, note if the patient mouth followed by cracking) may occur with a severe 
is cachectic, slim, plump or obese (Box 2.1). If obese, deficiency of iron or B vitamins. Niacin deficiency, if 
is it generalized or centrally distributed? Wasting of profound, may cause the typical skin changes of 
the temporalis muscle leads to a gaunt appearance, pellagra (Fig. 2.2).
and recent weight loss may result in prominence of 
the ribs. Other clues to poor nutrition include cracked 
skin, loss of scalp and body hair and poor wound Temperature
healing. Malnutrition together with acute or chronic Body temperature may be recorded in the mouth, 
illness results in blood albumin being low, leading to axilla, ear or rectum. A ‘normal’ mouth temperature 
oedema and making overall body weight an unreliable is 35.8-37°C. Those in the ear and rectum are 0.5°C 
marker of malnutrition. A smooth, often sore tongue higher and in the axilla 0.5°C lower. There is a diurnal 



SECTION one
17

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Figure 2.3  Dupuytren’s contracture. (From Forbes and Jackson 
2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, 

Figure 2.2  Pellagra as a result of niacin deficiency. (From  Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)
Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 
3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

Normal angle
<180°

variation in temperature; the lowest values are 
recorded in the early morning with a maximum 
between 6 and 10 pm. In women, ovulation is associ-
ated with a 0.5°C rise in temperature. In hospitalized 
patients, regular temperature measurements may 
identify certain characteristic patterns of disturbance. Normal nail
A persistent fever is one that does not fluctuate by 
more than 1°C during 24 hours; a remittent fever 
oscillates by 2°C during the course of a day; and an 
intermittent or spiking fever is present for only several 
hours at a time before returning to normal. None 
has great sensitivity or specificity for any particular 
diagnosis, but changes may provide useful information 
about the course of a disease.

Clubbed nail
Hands Figure 2.4  Lovibond’s angle refers to the angulation between the 
Examine the hands carefully as diagnostic information nail plate and the skin below the nail, when viewed laterally. 

Normally it is less than 180°. When clubbing is present, the angle 
from a variety of pathologies may be evident. The is at least 180°, or more. 
strength of the patient’s handshake may be informative 
with regard to underlying neurological or musculo-
skeletal disorders. Characteristic patterns of muscular Check for clubbing of the fingers. Normally, the 
wasting may accompany various neuropathies and angle of the fingernail and the nail base (Lovibond’s 
radiculopathies (see Ch. 16). Make note of any tremor, angle) is approximately 180° and the base feels firm 
taking care to distinguish the fine tremor of thyro- to palpation (Fig. 2.4). As clubbing develops, the 
toxicosis or recent beta-adrenergic therapy from the tissues at the base of the nail are thickened and 
rhythmical ‘pill rolling’ tremor of Parkinsonism (see Lovibond’s angle is lost. Subsequently, the nail 
Ch. 16) and from the coarse jerky tremor of hepatic becomes more convex both transversely and longi-
or uraemic failure (sufficiently slow to be referred tudinally and seems to ‘float’ in a softened nailbed. 
to as a metabolic ‘flap’) or the intention tremor of In normal nails, when both thumbnails are apposed, 
cerebellar disease. a diamond-shaped gap is created, called Schamroth’s 

Feel for Dupuytren’s contracture in both hands, window. With clubbing, a combination of the thick-
the first sign of which is usually a thickening of tissue ened nail bed and the loss of Lovibond’s angle dictates 
over the flexor tendon of the ring finger at the level that this window is reduced or even obliterated. In 
of the distal palmar crease. With time, puckering of gross cases (usually due to severe cyanotic heart 
the skin in this area develops, together with a thick disease, bronchiectasis or empyema), the volume of 
fibrous cord, leading to flexion contracture of the the finger pulp increases (Fig. 2.5) and becomes 
metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal bulbous like the end of a drumstick. The toes may 
joints. Flexion contracture of the other fingers may also be affected. Lesser degrees of clubbing may 
follow (Fig. 2.3). be seen in bronchial carcinoma, fibrosing alveolitis, 



18 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Figure 2.5  Clubbing of the fingers. This case is very marked. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 
3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

Figure 2.6  Small dermal infarcts in infective endocarditis. (From 
Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 
3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

Figure 2.8  Nail-fold infarction. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 
Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, 
Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

but may also be the result of trauma in normal 
individuals and are therefore rather non-specific.

Trophic changes may be evident in the skin in 
certain neurological diseases and in peripheral circula-
tory disorders such as Raynaud’s syndrome, in which 
vasospasm of the digital arterioles causes the fingers 
to become white and numb, followed by blue/purple 
cyanosis and then redness due to arteriolar dilatation 
and reactive hyperaemia (Fig. 2.9).

In koilonychia the nails are soft, thin and brittle 
Figure 2.7  Splinter haemorrhages. (From Forbes and Jackson and the normal convexity replaced by a spoon-shaped 
2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, concavity (Fig. 2.10). It is a rare feature of longstanding 
Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.) iron-deficiency. Leuconychia (opaque white nails) 

may occur in chronic liver disease and other conditions 
associated with hypoalbuminaemia (Fig. 2.11) but 

inflammatory bowel disease and infective endocarditis. are not particularly useful for making a clinical 
The last of these may also be associated with Osler’s diagnosis of chronic liver disease.
nodes – transient, tender swellings due to dermal Beau’s lines are horizontal (transverse) depressions 
infarcts from septic cardiac vegetations (Fig. 2.6). in the nail that may result from any disease process, 
Splinter haemorrhages (Fig. 2.7) and nail-fold infarc- illness, chemotherapy or malnutrition that constitutes 
tions (Fig. 2.8) may be signs of a vasculitic process a sufficient insult to affect the growth plate of the 



SECTION one
19

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Odours
Certain odours may provide diagnostic clues. The 
odour of alcohol on the patient’s breath is easily 
recognizable, but do not assume that an alcoholic 
foetor implies alcoholism or that all the patient’s 
current symptoms and signs are related to alcohol 
intoxication. Patients with alcohol dependence may 
have reversible problems such as hypoglycaemia 
or a subdural haematoma. The odour of diabetic 
ketoacidosis resembles acetone (‘pear drops’ or nail 
varnish remover) and those of hepatic failure and 
uraemia have been described as ‘ammonia-like’ or 
‘mousy’, respectively, but such terms are rather subjec-
tive and their use is limited. Halitosis (bad breath) is 

Figure 2.9  Raynaud’s syndrome in the acute phase with severe common in patients with suppurative lung diseases 
blanching of the tip of one finger. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 and those with gingivitis due to poor dental hygiene. 
Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, As with all smells, they are difficult to describe but 
Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.) can be characteristic when previously experienced 

and learnt.

Face and neck
In addition to important expressions and features of 
mood and attitude noted above, important diagnostic 
clues may be easily apparent on inspection of the 
face. Examination of the cranial nerves is covered in 
Chapter 16, but palsies of the III (Fig. 16.5) and VII 
(Fig. 2.12) nerves may be obvious simply on inspec-
tion. Parotid swellings are usually easily apparent; 
the tender bilateral parotid swelling of mumps or 
the unilateral swelling with reddening of the skin 
from acute parotitis can be contrasted with the non-

Figure 2.10  Koilonychia. (Reproduced with permission from Mir tender bilateral enlargement that sometimes accom-
2003 Atlas of Clinical Diagnosis, 2nd edn, Saunders, Edinburgh.) panies chronic alcohol use (and possibly accompanying 

liver disease). Some patients with mitral stenosis have 
a bright, circumscribed flush over the malar bones, 
and in some patients with systemic lupus erythema-
tosus there is a red raised eruption on the bridge of 
the nose extending onto the cheeks in a ‘butterfly’ 
distribution (Fig. 2.13). Telangiectases, minute capillary 
tortuosities, may be seen on the face in liver disease 
and rarely, as a hereditary disorder (Fig. 2.14). In 
systemic sclerosis, there may be radial puckering 
(furrows) around the mouth (Fig. 2.15) that, as the 
skin becomes tighter, limits the extent to which the 
mouth may be opened (Fig. 2.16).

The neck should be inspected and palpated. 
Examination of the jugular venous pulse (JVP) is 
described in detail in Chapter 13 but is an important 

Figure 2.11  Leuconychia in a patient with chronic liver disease. part of the examination in all patients, not just those 
(From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical with suspected cardiovascular disease. It may con-
Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind tribute useful information regarding the severity of 
permission.) lung disease, and its careful assessment is particularly 

important in patients with suspected disturbance of 
nail. Fingernails grow at a rate of 1 mm per day, fluid and electrolyte balance.
so the timing of the disease onset can be estimated Neck swellings are usually best felt from behind the 
by measuring the distance from the Beau’s line to patient. The general principles of lymph node palpa-
the nail bed. They disappear over several months as tion are described below, and the details of examina-
the nail grows out. tion of the thyroid are covered in Chapter 18.



20 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

A B

Figure 2.12 A,B  Lower motor neuron palsy of the right facial nerve (Bell’s palsy). 

Figure 2.14  Hereditary telangiectasia. The telangiectasia can be 
seen at the margin of the lips and on the lower lip. 

ment should always be noted. Lymph from the arm 
drains into the axillary nodes. These should be rou-
tinely examined but particularly in conjunction with 
examination of the breast (see below). Lymph from 
the lower limbs drains via deep and superficial inguinal 

Figure 2.13  Classic butterfly wing rash in a young patient with nodes, although only the latter can be palpated and, 
systemic lupus erythematosus. in turn, comprise a vertical and horizontal group. 

The vertical inguinal nodes lie close to the upper 
part of the long saphenous vein and drain the leg. 

Lymph glands and lymphadenopathy The horizontal group lies above the inguinal ligament 
and drains the lower abdominal skin, anal canal, 

Details pertaining to the examination of specific external genitalia (excluding the testes), buttocks and 
lymph node groups may be found in the relevant lower vagina.
chapters (e.g. Ch. 21 for cervical lymphadenopathy). Examination of lymph nodes involves inspection 
Here, the principles of palpating for lymphadenopathy and palpation. Inflammation of the overlying skin 
will be covered. Lymph nodes are interposed along and associated pain usually implies an infective 
the course of lymphatic channels, and their enlarge- aetiology, whereas malignant lymphadenopathy is 



SECTION one
21

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Post- Preauricular
auricular

Upper
cervical

Posterior
triangle

Submental

Supra- Submandibular
clavicular

Pretracheal

Middle cervical

Lower cervical

Figure 2.17  The cervical lymph node groups. 

Figure 2.15  Radial puckering (furrows) around the mouth in slightly towards the side of examination in order to 
systemic sclerosis. relax the overlying muscles. Feel for each of the 

groups shown in Fig. 2.17 in whatever order you find 
most efficient and reliable. Muscles and arteries in 
the neck and groin may be mistaken for lymph nodes. 
If in doubt, try to move the structure in question in 
two directions (laterally and superior to inferior). It 
should be possible to move a lymph node in two 
directions but not an artery or muscle.

Determining whether a lymph node is pathological 
can be difficult and requires practice and experience. 
In general, small, mobile, discrete lymph nodes are 
frequently found in normal individuals, particularly 
those who are slim and have little overlying adipose 
tissue. The finding of an enlarged lymph node should 
prompt the question ‘Is this consequent upon local 
pathology, for example infection or malignancy, or is 
it part of a more generalized abnormality of the 
reticuloendothelial system (including other lymph 
node groups, liver and spleen)?’ (Fig. 2.18).

Axillae
Most information from examination of the axillae 
comes from palpation for possible lymphadenopathy 
(Fig. 2.19), but inspection may reveal an absence/
paucity of secondary sexual hair in either gender 

Figure 2.16  Limited mouth opening in systemic sclerosis. (most commonly in association with chronic liver 
disease but also in certain endocrinopathies), abnormal 
skin colouring, such as the dark velvety appearance 

usually non-tender. To palpate for lymphadenopathy, of acanthosis nigricans (characteristic of insulin resist-
use the pulps of your fingers (usually the index and ance and occasionally gastric cancer, Fig. 2.20), or 
middle but, for large nodes, the ring as well) to move (very rarely and almost always in the presence of 
the skin overlying the potentially enlarged node(s). café au lait spots elsewhere) the characteristic freckling 
Determine the size, position, shape, consistency, of von Recklinghausen’s disease (Fig. 2.21).
mobility, tenderness and whether it is an isolated Support the weight of the patient’s arm by holding 
lymph node or whether several coalesce. For the head his arm at the elbow with your non-examining hand 
and neck nodes, it is often helpful to tilt the head so that the patient’s pectoral muscles are relaxed. 



22 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Figure 2.20  Acanthosis nigricans (sometimes seen in insulin 
resistance and gastric cancer) visible in the axilla.

Figure 2.18  Gross enlargement of supraclavicular and cervical 
lymph nodes. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text 
of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by 
kind permission.)

Figure 2.21  Freckling and neurofibromas in von 
Recklinghausen’s disease.

feeling for enlargement of the pectoral and subscapular 
lymph nodes respectively. Use your left hand in the 
same way to examine the right axilla.

Skin
Examination of the skin with respect to specific 
dermatological diagnoses is covered in Chapter 19. 
In the context of the general examination, the most 
important features relate to temperature, hydration, 
pallor, colour/pigmentation and cyanosis. Use the 
back of your fingers to assess the temperature of 
the skin. This complements rather than replaces the 
formal measurement with a thermometer. There may 
be generalized warmth in febrile illness or thyrotoxi-
cosis or localized warmth if there is regional inflam-

Figure 2.19  Gross (in this case, painless) axillary lymph node mation. Cold skin may be localized, such as when a 
enlargement. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text limb is deprived of its blood supply, or generalized 
of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by in states of circulatory failure, when the skin feels 
kind permission.) clammy and sweaty.

Lift a fold of skin and make note of its thickness, 
With the fingers of your right hand cupped together, mobility and how easily it returns to its original 
probe the apex of the left axilla, then slide them position (turgor). The skin on the back of the hand 
downwards against the chest wall to feel for is often thin and fragile in elderly patients, may show 
lymphadenopathy. Next, ‘sweep’ your fingers along decreased mobility in scleroderma (Fig. 2.22) or in 
the inside of the anterior and posterior axillary folds, oedematous states and have reduced turgor in the 



SECTION one
23

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Figure 2.22  Advanced scleroderma. (From Forbes and Jackson 
2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, 
Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

presence of dehydration. The skin of acromegalic 
patients is typically thick and greasy.

Make note of the colour of the skin (the fol-
lowing description is less relevant to people with 
dark skin). Normal skin colour varies considerably; 
some people have a fresh complexion and others, 
although completely healthy, a pale one. Pallor may 
be seen temporarily in haemorrhage, shock and in Figure 2.23  The characteristic plethoric appearance of a patient 
intense emotion. Anaemic patients are often pale, with Cushing’s syndrome. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color 
but not all pale people are anaemic. The colour of Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. 
the mucous membrane of the eyelids and mouth is Reproduced by kind permission.)
a better indication of anaemia than the colour of 
the skin.

Yellowness of the skin is usually due to jaundice. 
A pale lemon-yellow tinge is characteristic of haemo- the latter situation, blood passes directly from the 
lytic jaundice, whereas in obstructive jaundice there right to the left side of the heart, without passing 
is a dark yellow or orange tint, sometimes accompanied through the pulmonary circulation, thereby failing 
by scratch marks from itching caused by bile salts. to become oxygenated. Central cyanosis is generalized 
Lemon tinge may also be associated with uraemia, and the peripheries are often warm. At least 5 g/dl 
which may occasionally also cause a 'frosting’ of the of reduced haemoglobin is necessary to produce 
lips or forehead – so-called ‘uraemic frost’. central cyanosis, and it is therefore less marked in 

An important determinant of skin colour is the anaemic patients. The cyanosis of heart failure is 
relative amount of oxyhaemoglobin and deoxyhae- often due to both peripheral and central causes. The 
moglobin. Oxyhaemoglobin is a bright red pigment. presence of central cyanosis is best appreciated at 
An increase in its flow beneath thinned facial skin the lips, mucous membranes and conjunctivae, where 
causes the characteristic plethora of Cushing’s syn- the keratinized skin is thinnest (Fig. 2.24).
drome (Fig. 2.23), whereas a decrease in flow causes 
pallor. As blood passes through the capillary bed, Pulses
oxygen is given up to metabolizing tissues to produce 
deoxyhaemoglobin. This has a darker, less red, more Arterial pulses are detected by compressing the 
bluish pigment, and its presence in peripheral blood relevant vessel against a firm underlying structure, 
vessels in increased amounts causes the clinical sign usually a bone. Details of the characteristic pulse 
of cyanosis. There are two physiological types of abnormalities that help in the diagnosis of various 
cyanosis: peripheral and central. Peripheral cyanosis cardiac disorders are described in Chapter 13, but 
is associated with increased extraction of oxygen palpation of all the peripheral pulses should form 
from capillaries when peripheral blood flow is slowed, part of the general examination of all patients. Some 
often due to vasospasm caused by cold, heart failure may be difficult to feel and you may need to vary 
or anxiety. The cyanosed extremity is usually cold the degree of pressure in order to pick up the relevant 
and the tongue is unaffected. Any condition causing pulsation. On occasion, you may confuse the patient’s 
slowing of the peripheral circulation may lead to pulse with your own. Feel your own pulse on the 
peripheral cyanosis as there is more time for oxygen side of your forehead with your other hand and 
extraction. Central cyanosis is caused by inadequate compare it with the patient’s, as they will usually be 
oxygenation of blood, in turn due to heart failure, different.
serious respiratory disease or mixing of venous and The radial pulse is palpated by gentle pressure of 
arterial blood across a right to left cardiac shunt. In the artery against the distal shaft of the radius, using 



24 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿
Figure 2.24  Central cyanosis in a patient 
with severe respiratory disease (left) 
compared to the tongue of a normal person. 
(From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas 
and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, 
Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind 
permission.)

the tips of the index and middle fingers. It provides the right hand to examine the left DP pulse; the right 
information about rate and rhythm, although signifi- pulse is often best felt with the right hand from the 
cant abnormalities in character may also be detected. left side of the patient.
If the rhythm is regular, it is safe to count the number To feel the posterior tibial (PT) pulse, with the 
of beats for 15 seconds and multiply by 4 for the patient’s foot relaxed between plantar- and dorsiflex-
rate. Irregular and very slow pulses require palpation ion, press your curved fingers against the distal part 
for a full minute. Palpating both radial pulses simul- of the tibia, approximately 1 cm behind and below 
taneously can give useful information in selected the medial malleolus. The PT pulse may be difficult 
patients. Atheromatous narrowing of the axillary to feel and require extra patience and pressure in 
artery may cause reduced strength of one radial pulse obese or oedematous patients.
compared to the other, as may aortic dissection.

To palpate the femoral pulse, press deeply below Blood pressure
the inguinal ligament, midway between the anterior 
superior iliac spine and the symphysis pubis. The The physiology of blood pressure measurement 
pulse is usually easily felt against the underlying (including a description of the Korotkoff sounds) is 
femur. In obese patients it may be useful to use two given in Chapter 13. Many doctors and medical 
hands, one on top of the other. Occasionally, such as students neglect to measure the blood pressure 
in young patients with hypertension, it may be routinely in the belief that it is somehow a ‘nursing’ 
appropriate to examine for radio-femoral delay. Here, observation. This is a poor habit to adopt, not least 
the radial and femoral pulses on one side of the body because, once the technique has been mastered, it 
are palpated at the same time. The pulsation should can be easily combined with simultaneous, unobtrusive 
occur simultaneously; any delay may suggest coarcta- observations of the patient that may provide useful 
tion of the aorta, in which the aorta is constricted diagnostic information without his feeling self-
just beyond the subclavian artery. Blood flow to the conscious. Although not necessary or appropriate to 
arms is good, but to the legs is poor such that the perform routinely, assessment for postural (orthostatic) 
pulse is weak and delayed. hypotension is frequently informative in older patients, 

The popliteal pulse is the most difficult to palpate. particularly those with symptoms of unsteadiness, 
Flex the knee to approximately 120° and, with your syncope or presyncope, or those taking medication 
thumbs on the patella, place your fingers in the for hypertension. It is defined as a drop in blood 
popliteal fossa such that they meet in the midline. pressure of >20/10 mmHg within 3 minutes of 
Occasionally, it may be necessary to have the patient changing from a supine to an upright position. Various 
lie prone with the knee flexed to 90° and the leg ‘protocols’ are adopted; the authors favour measure-
resting against the shoulder or upper arm; press the ment of blood pressure supine after a period of calm 
thumbs deep into the popliteal fossa. rest and then every minute for 3 minutes after moving 

The dorsalis pedis (DP) pulse is palpated by pressing to a vertical position. Together with assessment of 
against the tarsal bones just lateral to the extensor the JVP, it can provide important information about 
tendon of the great toe, although in some patients it volume status in the evaluation of patients with fluid 
may be necessary to explore the dorsum of the foot and electrolyte abnormalities, such as those with 
more widely. In general, it is most convenient to use recent gastrointestinal bleeding.



SECTION one
25

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Legs and feet vulnerable to pressure ulcers caused by obliteration 
of arteriolar and capillary blood flow to the skin.

Examination of the legs requires adequate exposure Inspect the legs for easily seen oedema (fluid in 
from the groins and buttocks to the toes. Note the the subcutaneous tissue that appears as swelling) and 
colour and texture of the skin. Peripheral vascular examine for pitting oedema. Press firmly but gently 
disease often makes the skin shiny and hair does not behind the medial malleolus, over the dorsum of the 
grow on ischaemic legs or feet (Fig. 2.25). Pressure foot and on the shin. If oedema is present, a depression/
on the toes of ischaemic feet will cause blanching of concavity will form and persist for some time (Fig. 
the characteristic purple colour with subsequent slow 2.26). The skin over oedematous feet and shins has 
return. Passive elevation of an ischaemic leg leads to a pallid, glossy appearance and a characteristic doughy 
marked pallor of the foot as perfusion against gravity feel. The best place to look for mild degrees of oedema 
falls. Painless trophic lesions, often with deep ulcera- in cardiac disease is behind the malleoli in patients 
tion, may be seen in diabetic peripheral neuropathy. who are ambulant and over the sacrum in those who 
The posterior aspect of the heels is a particularly are confined to bed. Usually, 5-10 seconds of finger 
important area to inspect in elderly, emaciated or pressure is sufficient to produce the typical shallow 
neurologically impaired patients, all of whom are pit but it may be necessary to press for 20-30 seconds 

to avoid overlooking mild degrees of oedema. Some 
doctors grade oedema on a 4-point scale (slight and 
short-lived after relief of pressure to very marked 
and long lasting), although the system is poorly 
standardized. Oedema due to cardiac disease or to 
conditions associated with a low plasma protein level 
is bilateral. In local venous obstruction the oedema 
is confined to the parts from which the return of 
blood is impeded. Thus, oedema of an arm occurs 
when malignant lymph nodes constrict the axillary 
vein, and unilateral leg oedema will develop if the 
ileofemoral vein is occluded. The oedema of lymphatic 
obstruction does not pit on pressure.

Varicose veins should be looked for with the patient 
standing (Fig. 2.27). Superficial varicosities are gener-

Figure 2.25  Peripheral vascular disease. There is pallor, loss  ally obvious in this position, whereas the efficiency 
of hair and early ulceration on the dorsum of three toes. (From of the valves of the long saphenous vein should be 
Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, assessed by Trendelenburg’s test. With the patient 
3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.) lying, the saphenous vein is emptied by elevating the 

Figure 2.26  Pitting oedema in a patient with cardiac failure. A depression remains in the oedema for several minutes after firm fingertip 
pressure is applied. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by 
kind permission.)



26 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Figure 2.27  Varicose veins. (From Forbes and Jackson 2002 Figure 2.28  Gynaecomastia in a male patient. (From Forbes and 
Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, Mosby, Jackson 2002 Color Atlas and Text of Clinical Medicine, 3rd edn, 
Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.) Mosby, Edinburgh. Reproduced by kind permission.)

leg. Occlude the upper end of the vein by finger 
pressure on the saphenous vein opening (alternatively or inversion of the nipples. Simple longstanding 
use a tourniquet) and ask the patient to stand while inversion is often a normal phenomenon, but associ-
maintaining this pressure. If the valves are incompe- ated retraction of the areola or recent nipple inversion 
tent, the veins will rapidly fill from above when the are more sinister. Ask the patient to raise her arms 
pressure is released. above her head. This manoeuvre allows inspection 

Venous thrombosis is rare in healthy mobile sub- of the inframammary fold and may expose subtle 
jects but frequently complicates enforced bed rest, contour abnormalities. Now, with the patient supine, 
particularly after surgery. The affected limb will be ask the patient to rest one arm above her head. This 
swollen. The circumference of the calf should be helps spread the breast tissue more evenly across the 
measured and compared with the unaffected leg chest and makes palpation of any nodules easier. For 
at the same distance below the tibial tuberosity. A ease of annotation, the breast is usually divided into 
discrepancy of more than 1 cm is significant. The four quadrants, with the upper outer quadrant extend-
affected leg is also tender and warmer than normal, ing into an axillary tail. Use the pads of your middle 
with dilated superficial veins which do not collapse three fingers to palpate the breast, using rotatory 
when the leg is elevated. Forceful dorsiflexion of movements gently to compress the tissue against the 
the foot may cause pain in the calf (Homan’s sign). chest wall. Proceed systematically to examine all 
Sometimes a deep vein thrombosis may extend quadrants, the tail and areola. Sometimes it is useful 
up the thigh leading to a tender, hard, palpable to support the breast with the other hand in order 
femoral vein. to aid examination, especially when the breasts 

are large.
Breasts Breast tissue is variable between patients, ranging 

from smooth to granular, and may change in a given 
Examination of the breasts should form part of the individual with the menstrual cycle. For any nodule, 
routine clinical assessment, usually at the time of note its size, shape, consistency, tenderness, mobility 
examination of the chest. It requires tact and sensitiv- and the presence of any tethering or skin ulceration. 
ity and should be conducted with a chaperone. With Ask the patient to press her hands against her hips. 
the patient disrobed to the waist, the arms should If the lump becomes less mobile, it is likely to be 
be in a relaxed position by the sides. By inspection, attached to the pectoral muscles. Fixation to skin 
make note of the size, symmetry, contour (e.g. any may be assessed by moving the skin overlying the 
dimpling) and colour of the breasts. Inflammatory lump independently. If this is not possible then skin 
breast cancer with oedema of the overlying skin may involvement is likely.
produce a characteristic look and texture termed Swelling of male breast tissue is usually easily 
peau d’orange (orange peel skin). Note any asymmetry apparent (Fig. 2.28). Distinguishing true glandular 



SECTION one
27

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿
enlargement from pectoral fat may be facilitated with ■	 Tactile vocal fremitus.
the patient’s arms above his head. At some stage of ■	 Percuss the lungs.
puberty, most boys will have a palpable disc of tissue. ■	 Auscultate the breath sounds.

■	 Vocal resonance.

Putting it all together Cardiovascular and respiratory  
(posterior, sitting forward)

The information given in this and subsequent chapters ■	 Inspect for symmetry of movement, scars.
describes techniques of physical examination that ■	 Chest expansion.
may be helpful in elucidating the cause of a patient’s ■	 Tactile vocal fremitus.
symptoms. It is not implicit that all of these examina- ■	 Percuss the lungs.
tions should be performed in all patients. For example, ■	 Auscultate the breath sounds.
it is not appropriate to make a detailed assessment ■	 Vocal resonance.
of the neurological system in someone in severe ■	 Inspect for sacral oedema.
respiratory distress due to pulmonary oedema or in 
abdominal pain from peritonitis. Initially, both alone Neck (while sitting forward)
and during teaching, you will probably practise ■	 Thyroid palpation.
examining individual systems (e.g. the cardiovascular ■	 Cervical, submandibular lymphadenopathy.
system). Soon, however, you will be ready to conduct 
a complete examination. The following is a suggested Abdomen
order for the student to practise, and doctor to ■	 Inspection: size, distension, asymmetry, scars, 
perform, in all hospitalized patients who are not abdominal wall movements, dilated vessels, 
acutely ill, in order to exclude any major abnormality visible peristalsis, pulsations, pubic hair, spider 
in the various bodily systems. naevi.

■	 Palpation: tenderness, rigidity, hyperaesthesia, 
General masses, organomegaly, hernial orifices, inguinal 
■	 Overall appearance (well, unwell, severely ill; lymphadenopathy, genitalia, digital rectal (where 

neglected or well-cared for). relevant).
■	 Posture and gait. ■	 Percussion: organomegaly, masses.
■	 Nutrition, obesity, oedema. ■	 Auscultation: bowel sounds, bruits.
■	 Skin colour, cyanosis, jaundice, anaemia.
■	 Skin lesions (spider naevi, vitiligo, purpura, Upper limbs

petechiae). ■	 Inspection: fasciculations, wasting, trophic 
■	 Body hair (distribution, quantity). changes.
■	 Vital signs (temperature, pulse, respiration rate). ■	 Test for tone, power, reflexes, coordination and 
■	 Obvious features of endocrine disease (e.g. cutaneous sensation.

Cushing’s, acromegaly, hyperlipidaemia). ■	 Test joints for swelling, pain and movement, if 
relevant.

Mouth and pharynx
■	 Odours, lips, tongue (ask to protrude), teeth, Lower limbs

gums, buccal mucous membrane, tonsils. ■	 Inspection: fasciculations, wasting, trophic 
changes, ulceration, varicose veins, oedema.

Hands ■	 Test for tone, power, reflexes, coordination and 
■	 Clubbing, tremor, wasting, arthropathy, cutaneous sensation.

metabolic flap, Dupuytren’s contracture, splinter ■	 Test joints for swelling, pain and movement, if 
haemorrhages, nail-fold infarcts, koilonychia, relevant.
leuconychia, nicotine stains. ■	 Peripheral pulses.

Cardiovascular and respiratory  Cranial nerves
(anterior, patient semi-recumbent) ■	 Visual acuity, pupillary responses, visual fields, 

extraocular movements, nystagmus fundoscopy.
■	 Radial pulse: rate, rhythm, character.

■	 Facial movements and sensation.
■	 Blood pressure, lying and standing.

■	 Rinne and Weber test.
■	 Jugular venous pulse.

■	 Palatal elevation, tongue appearance and 
■	 Carotid pulses, separately, both sides.
■	 Inspection for symmetry, scars, dilated vessels, protrusion.

breasts, nipples.
■	 Praecordial palpation: apex beat, thrills, heaves. Documentation and communication
■	 Auscultate the heart sounds.
■	 Palpate tracheal position. An accurate, concise record of a clinical episode is 
■	 Chest expansion. crucial for effective care. It serves as a tool for ordering 



28 2 General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿
the doctor’s thoughts as he reviews the findings before HPC:
constructing a provisional differential diagnosis. It ■	 Sudden-onset right-sided chest pain.
may identify errors or missing data (did I examine ■	 Worse on inspiration.
the reflexes?). It serves as a reminder of those thought ■	 Associated severe breathlessness; unable to 
processes at future consultations as the results of get comfortable.
investigations become available and/or the condition ■	 No cough or sputum or haemoptysis.
evolves, and it allows colleagues to pick up the ‘thread’ ■	 No injury or trauma to chest.
of a case in the event of the initial assessing doctor ■	 No previous similar episodes.
being unavailable. Furthermore, as rising expectations ■	 No recent periods of immobility.
and increasing availability of medical information via ■	 No leg swelling or pain.
the Internet embolden more patients to question the PMH:
quality of their care, accurate documentation is vital ■	 Appendectomy age 6.
in order to provide the evidence for the quality of ■	 Varicocoele found and surgically corrected 
the decision making and assessment in the event of age 25 following assessment for primary 
a disagreement between patient and doctor. All infertility.
medical note entries should be dated, timed and An important differential diagnosis in a patient 
signed and each page should have the patient’s name with pneumothorax is pulmonary embolism, some-
and hospital record number clearly written. times with prior deep venous thrombosis. The ‘nega-

The style and extent of note-taking will vary accord- tive’ features of the history (no leg symptoms, no 
ing to circumstance. For example, a postoperative recent immobility) ‘steer’ the narrative and any 
visit to a surgical outpatient clinic after a routine subsequent reader of the history away from this 
repair of a hernia is likely to focus exclusively on diagnosis but serve as a focus for its consideration. 
issues relating to pain and scar healing, with brief If a rigid system were recommended of documenting 
documentation. In contrast, the initial consultation all potentially relevant past medical and family history 
at a falls clinic will involve the expert in elderly prior to the presenting problem, the same history 
medicine gathering potentially relevant information might read:
about past medical history, current medication, social Mr JW, age 32, manual labourer, married, 2 
support and the history of the current problem, and children.
will certainly require a comprehensive physical Generally in excellent health and symptom free. 
examination. A GP is likely already to know the Keen sportsman.
details of the patient’s family, social, past medical No family history of deep vein thrombosis or 
and drug histories, so in the limited time available pulmonary embolism. No family history of tall 
will focus on the current problem. In all of these stature, lens dislocation, valvular heart disease 
situations, however, the clinician should avoid being (all features of Marfan’s syndrome, an important 
constantly engaged in writing notes or, increasingly, association with pneumothorax in young 
looking at a computer screen. Maintain eye contact patients). Varicocoele surgery age 25 with no 
as the patient talks about his problems. The following history of postoperative deep vein thrombosis or 
suggestions refer to a new patient consultation in the pulmonary embolism.
outpatient clinic or a non-acutely ill hospitalized PC: Breathlessness.
patient. The goal is to write a complete yet concise HPC:
record of the patient’s problem that can easily be ■	 Sudden-onset right-sided chest pain.
followed as a logical narrative by the next doctor to ■	 Worse on inspiration.
see that patient. ■	 Associated severe breathlessness; unable to 

Start with the routine social data: name, address, get comfortable.
marital status, occupation, dependent family members ■	 No cough or sputum or haemoptysis.
and children. The order in which the family, past ■	 No injury or trauma to chest.
medical and presenting complaint histories are docu- ■	 No previous similar episodes.
mented is not rigidly set. For those patients who have ■	 No recent periods of immobility.
enjoyed good health to the point of the current illness, ■	 No leg swelling or pain.
the presenting complaint and history of the current Although used as an extreme example, such a style 
problem fall naturally out of the context of the above of documentation could ‘obstruct access’ to the 
background information. Medical notes for such a presenting complaint. For many patients, however, it 
patient with (for example) a spontaneous pneumo- is appropriate to detail a pertinent family history 
thorax might read as follows: and/or past medical history prior to the current 
Mr JW, aged 32, manual labourer, married, 2 problem or as an ‘introduction/context’ to it. Good 

children. examples of this would include a middle-aged man 
Generally in excellent health and symptom free. with rectal bleeding and a strong family history of 

Keen sportsman. carcinoma of the colon, or a young person, breathless 
No relevant past medical history. on exertion, who underwent corrective surgery for 
PC: Breathlessness. congenital heart disease as a child. For other patients, 



SECTION one
29

General patient examination and differential diagnosis ﻿

Box 2.2  Example of a cardiovascular system statement Box 2.3  Framework of pathological processes informing a 
differential diagnosis

■	 Pulse 76 regular, peripheral pulses normal
■	 Neck veins not distended. No peripheral oedema ■	 Congenital
■	 BP 130/80 ■	 Degenerative
■	 Apex beat not displaced ■	 Infective/inflammatory
■	 Heart sounds I and II heard in all areas ■	 Metabolic
■	 No murmurs, lungs clear ■	 Neoplastic

■	 Nutritional
■	 Toxic
■	 Traumatic
■	 Vascular

the current problem is the latest development of a 
long-standing illness, such as cough and breathlessness 
in a patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. This skill of interweaving the past/family Box 2.4  Order of tasks to follow when constructing a 
history with the current problem will develop with provisional management plan
experience, so do not be disheartened if your notes 1	 List the monitoring/nursing recommendations that are 
initially seem disjointed. imperative to the patient’s immediate comfort, well 

Many patients have had medical and surgical being and safety
episodes in their history that are essentially ‘closed 2	 List the investigations that need to be done immediately 
events’, for example cataract removal, hernia repair (e.g. blood cultures and malaria film in a patient 
or tonsillectomy as a child. Although they may seem returning from overseas with a fever of unknown origin)
irrelevant to the current problem, they may subse- 3	 Document the medications you propose to prescribe, 
quently provide important useful information and it including the dosages and frequency of administration 
is important to document them meticulously. For (this includes intravenous fluid therapy)
example, knowing that a bilateral oophorectomy was 4	 List the investigations that may need to be done at 
performed at the time of a hysterectomy is helpful some stage in order to provide further diagnostic 
information in the assessment of a woman with ascites. information
The past medical history (if accurate) makes a 
diagnosis of carcinoma of the ovary highly improbable. 
Documentation of any surgical procedures, however 
minor, can provide reassuring or helpful anticipatory 
information in patients likely to undergo general Presenting a case
anaesthesia. Recording of the history concludes with It is very valuable to your learning to practice making 
the full list of drugs, dosages and dosing intervals, short summaries of your findings, emphasizing both 
any adverse reactions to previously prescribed medi- important positive findings and relevant negative 
cines and documentation of the review of systems ones. The summary should begin with the name, age, 
(see Ch. 1). sex and occupation of the patient and end with a 

Details of the physical examination should be brief statement of the problem. Another important 
documented in a clear, structured framework. Start skill to acquire is that of oral presentations of the 
with a general, non-judgemental comment about cases you see to colleagues; the ultimate test is the 
the patient’s overall appearance, such as ‘well man ability to communicate a difficult problem to a senior 
with moderate generalized adiposity’ or ‘drawn, colleague on the telephone. The history and findings 
anxious woman, breathless on undressing’. Record on examination should be communicated in temporal, 
important positive and negative features on general coherent order, making an interesting and easily 
examination, for example jaundice, clubbing, rash, grasped narrative.
fever, lymphadenopathy. The remainder of the 
examination should be documented under bodily 
systems: cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal Summary
(often referred to as abdominal), nervous system, 
skin, limbs and joints. Negative findings are often as Ultimately, the goal is for the clinician to use a 
pertinent as positive ones. Simple line drawings are combination of experience, knowledge and apprecia-
often particularly effective. A concise summary of the tion of the accuracy and limitations of history taking 
findings in the cardiovascular system might read as in and examination to try to come to a correct diagnosis, 
Box 2.2. or diagnoses, and facilitate the best treatment with 

The case notes should conclude with a brief the least discomfort and anxiety for the patient. As 
summary of the history and the major abnormalities with everything described in this chapter, there is no 
found on examination, which leads to the differential substitute for practice and an open-ended willingness 
diagnosis and management plan (Boxes 2.3 and 2.4). to learn from both success and error.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION ONE
GENERAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT

The next steps:
Differential diagnosis and initial management 3 

Michael Glynn

Introduction may be sufficient evidence to exclude a dissecting 
thoracic aortic aneurysm without the need to resort 

The term ‘Differential Diagnosis’ used to be very to an emergency CT scan.
widely used by doctors, but it now seems to be used The most common cause of an acute headache is 
less and is less well understood. It might be better probably a tension headache. There is no useful test 
termed as ‘Differential Diagnoses’, because the process for this and the diagnosis will largely be made on 
of preparing it is to formulate a list of possible history. Particularly in the emergency situation, there 
diagnoses that cover the clinical situation that presents are some very serious causes of acute headache which 
itself, usually written in the descending order of must not be missed, such as a subarachnoid haemor-
likelihood. It is a very important part of the overall rhage or a sagittal sinus thrombosis. Careful and 
management of a patient from initial presentation, accurate differentiation between these two is clearly 
particularly in the emergency situation. The doctor imperative because anticoagulation for a suspected 
clerking a patient may write a thorough history and 
complete a detailed examination and may write a 
good plan of management, but the intermediate step 
of preparing the differential diagnosis is often missed Box 3.1  Samples of common emergency medical problems 
or replaced by something which is entitled ‘Impres- and the contrast between a simple ‘Impression’ 
sion’ and this may only consider one possibility. Box and a full list of  ‘Differential Diagnoses’
3.1 gives three illustrations of situations in which the Presenting 
‘Impression’ is too restrictive, whereas a full differ- problem Impression Differential diagnoses
ential diagnosis would allow the treating doctors to 
consider the full range of possibilities, including those Chest pain Rule out Acute coronary syndrome
that are quite rare but nevertheless vitally important cardiac Pulmonary embolus
for the patient. cause Gastro-oesophageal reflux

One of the most common reasons for attendance Musculoskeletal pain
at an emergency department with chest pain is because Dissecting thoracic 
the patient himself or a referring doctor is worried aneurysm
that the patient may have chest pain of cardiac origin. Severe Likely Tension headache
This is the reason a receiving doctor might write headache migraine Migraine
‘chest pain, rule out cardiac cause’ as the overall Subarachnoid haemorrhage
‘impression’. However, there are other causes of acute Temporal arteritis
chest pain, both common and rare. There is often a Sagittal sinus thrombosis
feeling that suggesting rare diagnoses opens avenues Apparent Cerebral Cerebral infarction 
of investigations that are time consuming and expen- stroke infarction (thrombus or embolus)
sive, but this is far from the truth. For instance, it Cerebral haemorrhage
may take only brief consideration that the patient Carotid or vertebral 
may have a dissecting thoracic aortic aneurysm to dissection
return to the patient and clarify the character of the Hemiplegic migraine
chest pain (dissecting aneurysms produce pain that Brain tumour with 
is tearing in nature and clearly going through from haemorrhage
front to back) and to check the blood pressure in Cerebral abscess
both arms. Together with a simple chest X-ray, this Cerebral vasculitis



32 3 The next steps: Differential diagnosis and initial management

Box 3.2  Examples of key questions that help to confirm or may lie behind a consultation between patient and 
refute specific diagnoses doctor. Of particular relevance to the process of 

differential diagnosis and planning management is 
Diagnosis Key questions the degree to which patients want answers to queries 
Subarachnoid ■	 Was it the worst headache or want relief of symptoms. Quite a useful question 
haemorrhage you have ever had can be ‘Are you worried about your symptoms because 

■	 Did it start extremely suddenly of the trouble they give you and you want to be rid 
like a blow on the head of them, because of what might be wrong, or both’. 

Diarrhoea due to ■	 Does the need to open your This can be quite a confusing question for the patient, 
irritable bowel bowels ever wake you from but if explained carefully and answered specifically, 

your sleep (rare in irritable it can avoid a lot of unnecessary investigation. In 
bowel) addition, starting out on the right track can make 

Cardiac chest pain ■	 Does the pain feel like a subsequent management much simpler, and it is often 
weight pressing on your chest much easier to reassure a patient that there is nothing 

seriously wrong than to give him an exact diagnosis 
Intermittent ■	 Does the pain come on with a or full relief of symptoms. This process particularly 
claudication or predictable amount of applies to a patient who has a fear of cancer. In a 
angina pectoris exercise relatively young patient with quite harmless symptoms, 

even if a serious diagnosis is not really suspected, it 
may be necessary to perform some sort of investigation 

sagittal sinus thrombosis would be completely the (such as an endoscopy or a CT scan) to provide the 
wrong treatment for a subarachnoid haemorrhage. necessary reassurance, even if it is not absolutely 

The process of differential diagnosis does not mean necessary for the process of resolving the differential 
that every single possible cause needs to be specifically diagnosis.
excluded in every clinical situation. However, having The priority of different investigations, the order 
the full list of differential diagnoses written down in which they are done and the question of when 
helps the doctor weigh the likelihood of each one treatment is given all have to be considered and 
and then clarify the situation as is appropriate to the planned carefully. There is often quite a strong tempta-
particular clinical situation. This clarification will not tion for the doctor making the initial plan to start 
necessarily mean arranging complex investigations. off with quite a large series of investigations. This is 
It might mean just a mental check that the right often done because the doctor assumes the patient 
specific questions have been asked (such as the true needs the reassurance of normal tests, and to some 
nature of sudden headache) or making sure that extent doctors need that reassurance themselves. 
particular physical signs have been checked (such as There may even be a temptation to practice defensive 
differential blood pressure suggesting dissecting medicine to avoid being accused in the future of 
aneurysm). under-investigating and missing diagnoses. However, 

This reviewing, checking and clarification process this level of investigation is often not a productive 
which is mentally undertaken by the doctor clerking way forward, can overuse resources, can sometimes 
the patient is not something that needs to happen prevent other patients having their tests in a timely 
once the history and examination are completed. As manner, and according to circumstance, can be 
the student and doctor become more experienced in financially detrimental to the individual patient. 
the process of history and examination and the However, there may also be drawbacks to a logical 
preparation of the differential diagnoses, they will series investigation and planning out the next test 
begin to think through the patient’s problems as soon only when the results of the first one are known. On 
as the consultation begins. The consultation will often occasions, this can seem a slow and tedious process 
be punctuated by key questions that are aimed at for the patient, particularly if the health system allows 
confirming or refuting a particular diagnosis that has only relatively infrequent patient review. Box 3.3 
occurred to the doctor during the course of the illustrates some clinical scenarios and the contrast in 
clerking process. Box 3.2 is a list of some key questions investigation style.
and the diagnoses to which they refer.

What to write in the case notes
Management plan

Recording the possible differential diagnoses and the 
Having obtained the history and examination and thinking behind them at the time of an initial consulta-
formulated a list of differential diagnoses, the student tion is a very important process and can be crucial 
or doctor needs to decide on what should happen in getting to the correct diagnosis and avoiding the 
next. As with everything clinical, what the patient very real risk of neglecting a diagnosis that seemed 
actually wants is of paramount importance. Box 1.16 very possible at the outset but less so as clinical events 
in Chapter 1 gives a list of the general scenarios that change. This is particularly true if the relevant 



SECTION One
33

The next steps: Differential diagnosis and initial management

Box 3.3  Example clinical scenarios and contrasting Box 3.4  A ‘model’ write-up of a differential diagnostic list 
investigation styles in a patient presenting as an emergency with 

Clinical Logical Immediate chest pain (see Box 3.1), with relevant positive and 

scenario investigation investigation negative pointers written down for each possible 
diagnosis

Iron Gastroscopy – if  Gastroscopy and 
deficiency no ulcer then colonoscopy Differential 
anaemia with colonoscopy – if no combined and a diagnostic list Key features
dyspepsia in colonic source of check for coeliac Acute coronary Many risk factors, mildly raised 
a man blood loss then do disease – exclude syndrome initial troponin

coeliac check and or treat for Pulmonary embolus Sudden onset but pain not 
exclude or treat for parasites/worms pleuritic, not hypoxic and no ECG 
parasites/worms change

Transient Carotid ultrasound Carotid ultrasound, Gastro-oesophageal Burning pain but no previous 
ischaemic – if no clear cardiac ECHO and reflux dyspeptic history
attack embolic source blood tests for Musculoskeletal pain Tender right lower anterior ribs

then cardiac ECHO hypercoagulability Dissecting thoracic Blood pressure same in both arms, 
for possible all arranged at the aneurysm no mediastinal widening on CXR
cardiac source of same time
emboli – if normal 
then blood tests for 
hypercoagulability

Abnormal Blood tests for Do a full ‘liver a good style of clinical practice which states ‘once 
liver function viral hepatitis and screen’ in all you have thought of it, you need to exclude it’. This 
tests without ultrasound – if no patients including is particularly true in many areas of medicine which 
alcohol cause found then tests for viral now rely on teamwork and doctors changing their 
excess or blood tests for hepatitis, fatty duties from day to day. If the first doctor had con-
medication rarer liver diseases liver disease and sidered Addison’s disease as a possible diagnosis, it 
side-effect rarer liver diseases would often be unwise for a second doctor to come 

along and discard that possible diagnosis without 
arranging the specific test or at least considering it 
very carefully. This clinical approach applies in many 
situations, although each consultation is a clinical 

symptoms are likely to become less severe after the episode in its own right, and the doctor must make 
initial presentation. An example might be a patient the best judgement of the clinical circumstance 
who presents with chest pain and who is hypoxic. relevant to that moment in time.
When reassessed later, the hypoxia may have resolved 
and if the original differential diagnosis is not reviewed, 
the diagnosis of pulmonary embolus might be over- What to say to the patient
looked. It is particularly good practice to write down 
the differential diagnostic list annotated either with Every doctor has a duty to be truthful with patients. 
confirmatory features for each possible diagnosis or However, this does not mean there is duty to tell a 
any areas which lack confirmation. Such a list is given patient ‘the whole of the medical textbook’. This 
in Box 3.4. means that there is a duty to say what is likely and 

Some items on a list of possible differential diagnoses also what is serious, the two not always coincid-
may be more a result of a hunch on the part of the ing. For example, in a patient aged 46 attending a 
doctor rather than logical derivation from the available gastroenterology out-patient clinic with a change in 
information. This might particularly apply to condi- bowel habit of 3 months’ duration associated with 
tions that have relatively vague presentations rather some cramping abdominal pain and bloating and a 
than with a classical symptom complex. An example few episodes of bright red rectal bleeding, the most 
might be putting Addison’s disease on the differential likely diagnosis is of the irritable bowel syndrome 
diagnostic list of a patient who presents with a specific accompanied by some haemorrhoidal bleeding. A 
condition but has also been non-specifically unwell, full differential list would include as relatively likely 
has a relatively low systolic blood pressure and a diagnoses irritable bowel syndrome accompanied 
sodium concentration below the lower limit of normal. by some haemorrhoidal bleeding and also inflam
The initial focus would be on treating the specific matory bowel disease. A less likely but certainly a 
presentation. However, having Addison’s disease on serious diagnosis would be the presence of colorectal 
the differential list will allow this to be reviewed cancer, which would be unusual at age 46 but certainly 
later and investigation planned, such as a Synacthen not unknown. Rare diagnoses might include gut 
test. Addison’s disease would be a good example of vasculitis and ischaemic colitis. Good practice would 



34 3 The next steps: Differential diagnosis and initial management
be to say to the patient, ‘I think you have the irritable 
bowel syndrome accompanied by some haemor- Selecting appropriate investigations
rhoidal bleeding, but to exclude inflammatory bowel 
disease and the unlikely possibility of bowel cancer, I As with history taking and physical examination, 
recommend that you have a colonoscopy’ (the judicious selection of appropriate investigations to 
rarer diagnoses do not need to be mentioned at clarify a patient’s diagnosis is a skill that is devel-
this stage). oped through teaching, practice and a willingness 

to learn from mistakes. This is increasingly true 
as access to high-definition radiological imaging 

What to do when the diagnosis is unclear becomes more widespread and the vast majority of 
haematological and biochemical investigations are 

At the outset, the diagnosis relevant to any clinical automated and provided as a ‘package’ rather than 
situation is almost always unclear. Occasionally the individually selected. Although it might instinctively 
doctor may make a ‘spot diagnosis’, such as when a be thought by the student that the easy availability 
patient walks into the consulting room with obvious of such data could only be beneficial to a patient 
and previously undiagnosed Parkinson’s disease, (i.e. lead to the fortuitous diagnosis of unsuspected 
although the patient may have come with problems disease), in many cases it can lead to unneces-
and issues that have a different underlying cause. sary expense and patient anxiety. This is because 
After history and examination, the student or doctor asymptomatic benign lesions identified on imaging 
will prepare a list of Differential Diagnoses and a or minor disturbances of haematological/biochemical 
process of confirming or refuting those diagnoses will parameters necessitate further investigation and 
start, often with key investigations, or sometimes surveillance.
starting treatment and watching the effect of that Ask yourself the following questions when consider-
treatment. ing which investigations to request:

Doctors must be prepared for the not uncommon ■	 Will this test confirm/complement the 
situation in which the diagnostic list appears to be information derived from the history and 
exhausted and the patient’s condition has not examination?
improved. It is at this point that the initial diagnostic ■	 Will this test provide new information (such as 
list is particularly useful, to double check that it is a chest X-ray in a patient with a productive 
complete and to rethink what level of testing is cough and weight loss but no physical findings 
needed to confirm or refute any diagnoses. The list on examination)?
may well be reviewed in the light of how the clinical ■	 Could this test provide useful information over 
situation has evolved. a period of time as a marker of disease 

One particular issue will often arise which can be progression (e.g. the inflammatory markers 
posed as the question, ‘Which is more likely – a rare erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and 
condition that has not yet been thought of or a C-reactive protein (CRP) in a patient  
common condition that has been missed on the first with infective endocarditis. Neither test is 
round of testing?’ This way of looking at a problem specific for the diagnosis but changes in both 
will often lead to the repeat of an examination (e.g. values may be useful markers of disease 
an upper GI endoscopy) or an alternative look at the progression)?
same problem (e.g. an abdominal CT scan following ■	 What are the possibilities of this test yielding 
a normal ultrasound scan). It is certainly important clinically irrelevant/distracting information 
to realise that every medical test has an error rate, compared to a diagnostically informative result? 
even with the best quality control in laboratories and A good example of this would be the 
the highest standards in departments such as Radiology indiscriminate use of cranial computed 
and Endoscopy. tomography (CT) scans in patients with 

ill-defined neurological symptoms (such as 
dizziness) before a detailed neurological 

Multiple causation examination has been performed. Meningiomas 
(benign tumours arising from the meninges) are 

A common challenge facing the doctor is whether not-infrequent findings in patients undergoing 
to accept the clinical findings on the basis of a single cranial imaging. In a patient with dizziness 
process or whether to invoke more than one bodily without other neurological symptoms or signs, 
system or pathological process. This skill can be such a finding is likely to be irrelevant and, 
acquired only with time and experience but, in general, because the meningioma will need routine 
younger patients, shorter histories and examination surveillance, is likely to cause unnecessary 
findings confined to a single organ system tend to anxiety. In contrast, the finding of a meningioma 
favour a single cause, whereas multiple causation is in a patient with a carefully taken history of 
more likely among older patients with symptoms and focal seizures is likely to be highly relevant 
signs in more than one bodily system. (and, in fact, a reassuring finding for many 



SECTION One
35

The next steps: Differential diagnosis and initial management
patients as the differential diagnosis includes emergency nephrectomy is around 0.0003%  
many other, more aggressive, brain tumours (1 in 3000). In these and other situations, the 
with a bleak outlook). clinician must balance benefit and risk. The 

■	 What are the potential risks and discomfort  benefit can be diagnostic information leading  
to the patient of the proposed test (including to targeted treatment of a serious illness, or 
the risk of unnecessary anxiety generated  excluding problems for which the treatment  
by an irrelevant finding demanding further has significant risk. The risk is that of the 
evaluation)? In the case of routine investigation itself or of the anxiety or distress 
haematological and biochemical tests requiring that it may provoke.
straightforward venipuncture, the immediate ■	 What information does the laboratory and/or 
risk (aside from minor discomfort) is low. In the radiology department require to make this test 
case of coronary angiography, the risk of death maximally useful? A biopsy or surgical specimen 
is around 0.1% and of serious complication sent to the pathology laboratory is likely to 
(myocardial infarction, stroke, arrhythmia, yield much more diagnostic information when 
cardiac perforation) approximately 1.7%. accompanied by clinical details and a specific 
Following a kidney biopsy, the risk of a question than if delivered, speculatively, without 
haemorrhage sufficiently severe to require an either.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION ONE
GENERAL PATIENT ASSESSMENT

Ethical considerations 4 
William M. Drake

of a minor or a mentally disturbed person may consent 
Introduction be sought from the patient’s lawful parents or guard-

ians. Assent, but not consent, may be sought from 
The cornerstone of a good relationship between relatives, such as in the case of an unconscious patient 
doctor and patient is trust. In primary care, this in an intensive care unit. The doctor therefore 
relationship (often in the context of caring for the has a duty not only to advise but also to explain. 
whole family) may be built up over several years, This principle crosses all religious and cultural 
but in hospital practice or in an emergency, the patient boundaries.
and the doctor may be meeting for the first time. 
Patients expect a high standard of behaviour and care 
when they seek medical help. This includes the fol-
lowing expectations: Consent
■	 They will be consulted about decisions bearing 

on their treatment. The patient’s consent should be sought for any treat-
■	 They will be informed about their illness. ment, however minor, even when that consent might 
■	 They will be informed about the likely outcome appear implicit as, for example, by attendance at an 

of any treatment offered. emergency unit with injury. Sometimes assessment 
■	 Their right to confidentiality will be respected. of a minor symptom discloses a separate, more serious 

Always assume that a patient is able fully to issue. In such circumstances, consent to investigate 
understand the nature of the medical problem and the new problem is required.
its implications, regardless of your impression of their In order to give consent, a patient must have suf-
educational level. Some patients like to discuss what ficient, accurate information about the illness to make 
they would like to know early in a consultation and an informed judgement about whether its investigation 
many will say clearly what information they would and treatment are justified. There are four require-
like to be given to the family. Occasionally, family ments of the doctor discussing an intervention with 
members may feel that the patient would not be a patient:
able to comprehend medical information or ask that 1	 The procedure itself must be described, 
he be ‘protected’ from the full details of a serious including the technique and its implications and 
illness. Patients may insist that they do not wish the the intended benefit of doing it.
family to know about their medical problems or, 2	 Information about the risks and complications 
sometimes, that they themselves do not wish to know must be given, which usually means all the  
the diagnosis. In all such instances, the needs and risks, as well as some information about the 
rights of each individual patient should be considered consequences of the complication (e.g. 
paramount, over and above those of the family, in perforation at colonoscopy is a rare occurrence 
the event of conflict. but, if it happens, a laparotomy and colostomy 

may be needed).
3	 Associated risks (e.g. from anaesthesia or from 

Autonomy other drugs that may be necessary) should be 
described.

The fundamental principle underlying medical ethics 4	 Alternative medical or surgical investigations  
is autonomy: the patient has the right to decide his or treatments should be discussed, so that the 
own medical destiny. This gives rise to the concept reasons for the specific advice given are clear.  
of seeking the patient’s consent for medical interven- In addition, the implications of the ‘do nothing’ 
tions, for research and for teaching. Only in the case option should be discussed.



38 4 Ethical considerations ﻿

Obtaining consent Box 4.1  Criteria for having mental capacity
The amount of information divulged will vary accord- ■	 The patient can understand what has been explained
ing to the context of the discussion and according ■	 The patient can recall and repeat what has been 
to the needs of the patient as they emerge in the explained
consultation. The objective is not to place the patient ■	 The patient can discuss what has been explained and 
in the situation of having to decide between conflicting weigh information
medical data, but to explain why a particular investiga- ■	 The patient can communicate the decision that he has 
tion or treatment is being recommended. The patient made
must not feel under duress.

Setting the scene 3	 Consent must have been given voluntarily, and 
not under duress.

Discussions regarding consent for investigation 
and treatment should be conducted in a suitable Competence and capacity for consent
environment that is quiet, free of interruptions and The definition of mental capacity is given in Box 4.1. 
away from unnecessary observers, such as other If the patient does not have capacity to make a 
patients or unfamiliar nurses or students. Make decision, the doctor must involve the relatives, 
time for the discussion and turn off pagers or although the doctor is still making the final decision. 
mobile phones which, if they interrupt a discussion, If the patient does not have capacity and has no 
can give the impression that you are rushed and relatives, in the UK the doctor must involve an 
fitting the patient into a busier, more important independent mental capacity advocate (IMCA) to 
schedule. Use simple language that the patient can help with decision making, particularly if consenting 
understand. Be patient. If necessary, and with the for surgery or for decisions about change of living 
patient’s permission, involve relatives. If there is circumstances.
likely to be a language problem, make sure that an Special difficulties with consent arise when the 
interpreter (not a relative) is available. At the end of patient is unconscious. If treatment is necessary in 
the discussion, check that the patient has actually order to save life, it can and must be given without 
understood. A written summary of the information waiting for consent. If relatives are available, they 
supplied should be given to the patient for later should be consulted, but their wishes are not neces-
consideration. sarily paramount in the decision to initiate life-saving 

therapy. The relatives may thus assent to treatment 
Implications of consent or refusal but cannot legally consent to it (in the UK). This 
Some patients, after detailed discussion, decline the limitation also means that relatives cannot legally 
recommended investigation or treatment. This should refuse treatment that is medically in the best interests 
not result in the doctor being any less committed to of the patient, although a conflict of this kind should 
their welfare. Discussions regarding alternative be reason to consider, carefully and in detail with the 
strategies should commence within the framework relatives, the reasons for disagreement.
of what has been agreed and what is acceptable to Consent for the treatment of children requires 
the patient. special consideration. In general, a minor (i.e. a person 

If explicit consent is given, the patient and doctor under the age of 16 years) can be treated without 
should both sign an appropriate consent form. This parental consent, provided that care has been taken 
procedure should be followed for all serious interven- to ensure the child understands the nature of the 
tions. In hospital, this will be a standardized form, treatment proposed and its possible risks, adverse 
and a similar form should be used in family or private effects and consequences. However, this should be a 
practice to verify that the discussion took place. The most exceptional decision. In practice, the parents’ 
act of both parties signing the form does not constitute agreement should almost always be sought. An obvious 
proof that consent has been lawfully given but merely exception would be in an emergency, such as after 
documents that a discussion took place. It is good a life-threatening head injury or when non-accidental 
practice to make a separate, contemporaneous note injury is suspected. Difficult decisions sometimes 
describing what was discussed. arise, such as when the prescription of contraceptive 

drugs to a young girl is requested in circumstances 
Legal requirements for consent she does not wish her parents to know or parents 

refusing to allow a bleeding child to have a blood 
There are three aspects of consent that are required transfusion for religious reasons.
in law:
1	 The patient must be mentally and legally Appropriately informed

competent to give consent. The point at which a patient can be considered to 
2	 The patient must have been sufficiently well be appropriately informed is a matter of judgement. 

informed to be able to give consent. Some patients make it clear that they do not wish 



SECTION One
39

Ethical considerations ﻿
for long and involved discussions whereas others are adviser to handle their financial and legal affairs 
comfortable only when very full explanations have during a severe illness. This generally requires permis-
been given. It is often necessary to strike a balance. sion from a court.
It is easy to frighten a patient by reciting unwelcome 
but rare possible complications of a procedure to An overriding duty to society
such an extent that he refuses treatment. This should Occasionally confidentiality may be relaxed in the 
not be the objective of discussing treatment and is context of a known or possibly pending violent crime. 
rarely in the patient’s best interest. If a procedure In the case of an illness such as epilepsy or coronary 
is so risky that the doctor feels it is not justified and heart disease that might impair the ability to control 
is therefore futile, the patient should be advised a vehicle, the responsibility to inform the authorities 
accordingly rather than being asked to decide for rests with the patient. Voluntary disclosure is encour-
himself. aged, maintaining the principle of confidentiality 

between doctor and patient, but if the patient clearly 
does not make the disclosure, the clinician does have 

Confidentiality discretion to break this principle in circumstances 
The fact that all aspects of the encounter are confi- that entail serious public risk (e.g. a patient having 
dential forms the foundation for the consultation, as regular seizures who clearly has not informed the 
it allows the patient freedom of expression in the driving licensing authority).
knowledge that disclosures made within the confines 
of the consulting room will not be made available to Statutory disclosure
others. Confidentiality is breached in the case of certain 

The principle of confidentiality applies also to the infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, that are 
medical records. These are held by the doctor or the statutorily notifiable to the public health authorities. 
group practice or, in the case of hospital records, by There is also a statutory duty for a doctor to help in 
the hospital itself. Medical records are not available the identification of a driver involved in a road traffic 
to anyone other than the medical and nursing staff accident who, for example, might have attended a 
treating the patient, and are immune from police surgery or accident and emergency department 
powers of search. They are made available, however, after the accident. The doctor in the witness box is 
with the permission of the patient and, once disclosed, in a state of privilege and is protected against any 
can be used as evidence in court in both civil and action for breach of confidentiality when instructed 
criminal cases. Patients have the right to inspect their by a court to disclose potentially confidential 
own medical records after making a written applica- information. Similarly, a court can ask that medical 
tion. In the UK, the principle of confidentiality is documents be released to it if they are regarded as 
rigorously supported by the General Medical Council necessary for the completion of a fair trial of an 
and its breach is regarded as a serious matter. accused person.

The main situations in which confidentiality can 
be relaxed include the following: Inspection of medical records
■	 When the patient or his legal adviser allows it. Patients have a lawful right to inspect their own 
■	 When it is in the patient’s interests. medical records and can see any reports concerning 
■	 If there is an overriding duty to society as a their own medical condition that have been prepared 

whole. before they are released to another party. Such reports 
■	 In cases of statutory disclosure. can only be prepared with the permission of the 
■	 Sometimes after death. patient or at the request of a statutory body, as 

in the context of an order under the Mental 
With permission Health Act, or in the jurisdiction of a recognized 
A common example of relaxation of confidentiality court. Generally, persons other than the patient 
with the patient’s permission occurs when a consulta- have no right to inspect the medical records of an 
tion is witnessed (e.g. by medical students or a nurse). individual in the absence of written permission or 
The patient should be given the opportunity to ask when the records are subject to a subpoena from a 
that others leave. recognized court.

In the patient’s interests After death
When it is necessary that another family member be Generally, the principle of confidentiality should 
informed about the nature of a patient’s illness, for extend to patients who have died. In the cases of a 
example in order to obtain information essential for number of deceased public figures of recent years 
effective treatment, it may be judged in the patient’s (e.g. Winston Churchill and John F. Kennedy), this 
best interests to break confidentiality. Another example principle was not adhered to on the grounds (not 
might arise if a patient was judged mentally incom- universally accepted) that there were matters of 
petent and it became necessary to involve a legal public interest involved.



40 4 Ethical considerations ﻿

Organ donation record, and most hospitals now use a formal protocol 
to document this procedure. Patients should always 

When a tissue that can be replaced by the donor’s be resuscitated when cardiopulmonary collapse is 
own tissues, such as blood or bone marrow, is given unexpected and their wishes are unknown.
to another patient, no special ethical problem arises. 
When a living donor gives an irreplaceable organ, 
such as a kidney, difficulties arise. The donor must Consent for autopsy
be of sound mind, not under duress and must not 
be placed in a position to gain financially by the gift. Explicit consent is required for autopsy, as tissue 
The sale of organs for transplantation is forbidden in samples will be taken and examined and some may 
all developed countries and is rapidly becoming illegal be retained for future use. If this is intended or is 
in all countries. Similar considerations apply to the likely to occur, permission to retain the samples must 
acquisition of donor organs from a minor, a practice be obtained as part of the consent for autopsy. This 
about which it is particularly difficult to issue sound process of consent implies that the family will be 
guidelines. given some idea of what studies might be undertaken 

on the retained samples in the future. It may be 
considered appropriate to consider whether any 

Resuscitation circumstances might develop in which the family 
might reasonably expect to be informed of the results 

Resuscitation is generally available in hospitals in the of any such studies. For example, if information of a 
event that cardiopulmonary arrest occurs unexpect- predictive or genetic nature were to be obtained in 
edly. However, this is not always successful, and many relation to the risk of vascular disease or of specific 
patients, recognizing the terminal nature of their cancers, then the family might wish to know of this.
illness, may request that resuscitation not be attempted. 
This is an entirely valid request which should be 
respected once it is certain that the options are clearly Other ethical problems
understood by the patient.

There are several other problems that arise in medical 
Not for resuscitation practice, many of which are likely to become more 

important in the coming years.
Sometimes a patient is so seriously ill that resuscitation 
is deemed inappropriate by medical and nursing staff. Medical negligence
Clearly, this implies a value judgement by those 
concerned that, in some way, the patient’s life is not Inadvertent adverse events are common in clinical 
worth saving. The situation most frequently arises practice, but few of these result in any legal action. 
when a patient has terminal cancer; resuscitation Accusations of negligence often imply that a doctor-
followed by a few hours or days of further pain and patient relationship has broken down. For the doctor, 
discomfort might be regarded as an unnecessary such an action is distressing and sometimes profes-
prolongation of the illness. sionally damaging, even when shown to be unjustified.

The decision to withhold resuscitation is a matter In considering whether there has been negligence, 
for which it is proper always to seek the patient’s it is necessary to establish breach of professional duty 
full, informed consent. The patient’s views are para- (whether the standard of care afforded the patient 
mount and should be respected whatever the views fell below what was expected). The standard expected 
of the clinicians and nurses or even the relatives. is that of the ordinary skilled practitioner in the field 
Relatives have no legal rights in a decision about the in question, practising in the circumstances pertaining. 
possible resuscitation of another individual. Although It is not that of the greatest expert in the land. Thus, 
they may be consulted and their views noted, they in assessing possible negligence, a court will need to 
should not be allowed to influence a decision once establish:
it has been made by the individual, unless it is decided ■	 what the ordinary practice is
that the patient is not competent by reason of ■	 that the doctor did not follow this practice
dementia or some other impairment of judgement ■	 that the doctor undertook a course of clinical 
to reach a decision. Overt depression, for example, management that no ordinarily skilled doctor in 
might be a reason for not accepting a patient’s that specialty would have undertaken if acting 
expressed wish not to be resuscitated. with ordinary care.

Although it might be thought not helpful to a A mistake in diagnosis is not necessarily negligent, 
patient to discuss this issue openly, in fact the reverse and the test of the standard of care applicable to the 
is usually the case. Most patients near death are aware ordinary practitioner in the specialty will be applied 
of their situation and welcome the opportunity for by the court in considering this.
full discussion of the issues. The agreement of the Doctors are expected to keep up to date in their 
patient and medical staff should be signed in the case expertise by continuing medical education, and this 



SECTION One
41

Ethical considerations ﻿
is an aspect that is relevant to this judgement. Doctors ■	 How should expensive treatments that may be 
in training are expected, by and large, to exercise an possible for genetically determined disorders be 
appropriate standard of care, and no patient should made available?
expect a lower standard of care simply because ■	 Is it socially and economically appropriate to 
they are cared for by a junior doctor with less experi- prevent such disorders?
ence. This would clearly be wrong. It is imperative, The application of genetic information to medical 
therefore, that in treating a patient, advice and help practice is a current major area of change. It can be 
should be sought from senior colleagues whenever expected to have profound implications for the 
relevant. management of most aspects of disease and for the 

If negligence has occurred, the legal process will ways in which all societies view the acquisition and 
go on to attempt to establish what harm resulted availability of medical information.
from the negligence and that the harm would not 
have occurred if the negligent act had not been 
committed. Box 4.2  Declaration of Geneva propounded by the World 

Medical Association in Sydney (1968)
HIV On admittance to the medical profession:

Testing for HIV requires the consent of the patient ■	 I will solemnly pledge myself to consecrate my life to the 
or individual. It is usual to counsel the individual service of humanity
about the consequences of a positive result before ■	 I will give my teachers the respect and gratitude which 
testing, as there are implications for lifestyle, future is their due
health and even employment hinging on the result ■	 I will practise my profession with conscience and dignity
of the test. ■	 The health of my patients will be my first consideration

■	 I will respect secrets that have been confided in me, 
even after the patient has died

Genetics ■	 I will maintain by all the means in my power the honour 
The rapidly evolving availability of relatively accurate and noble traditions of the medical profession

■
genetic testing for susceptibility to inherited diseases, 	 My colleagues will be my brothers

■
based on the modern understanding of DNA and the 	 I will not permit considerations of religion, nationality, 
genetic code, has raised a number of ethical problems race, party politics or social standing to intervene 
for which most societies are not well prepared. For between my duty and my patient

■
example: 	 I will maintain the utmost respect for human life from 

the time of conception. Even under threat I will not use 
■	 Who should have genetic tests done?
■	 What should be done with the results? my medical knowledge contrary to the laws of humanity

■	 I make these promises solemnly, freely and upon my 
■	 Who, if anyone, should have access to the 

information, other than the patient? honour

Box 4.3  International Code of Medical Ethics
Duties of doctors in general Duties of doctors to the sick
■	 To maintain the highest standards of professional ■	 There is an obligation to preserve life

conduct ■	 The patient is owed complete loyalty and all the resources 
■	 To practise uninfluenced by motives of profit of medical science. Whenever a treatment or examination 
■	 To use caution in divulging discoveries or new techniques is beyond the capacity of the doctor, the advice of another 

of treatment doctor should be sought
■	 To certify or testify only those matters with which the ■	 A doctor must always preserve absolute secrecy 

doctor has personal experience concerning all he knows about a patient because of the 
■	 To ensure that any act or advice that could weaken confidence trusted in him

physical or mental resistance of an individual must be ■	 Emergency care is a humanitarian duty that must be 
used only in the interest of that individual given, unless it is clear that there are others better able 

The following are unethical practices to give it
■	 Any self-advertisement except as expressly authorized in a Duties of doctors to each other

national code of ethics ■	 A doctor must behave to his colleagues as he would have 
■	 Collaboration in any form of medical service in which the them behave toward him

doctor does not have professional independence ■	 A doctor must not entice patients from his colleagues
■	 Receipt of any money in connection with services rendered ■	 A doctor must observe the principles of the Declaration of 

to a patient other than a proper professional fee, even if Geneva
the patient is aware of it



42 4 Ethical considerations ﻿

Genetic counselling genetic disorders are largely undetermined at present. 
Genetic counselling is relatively long established. The Practice in this context will change as knowledge 
clinical geneticist will usually be asked to assess the and experience accumulate.
risks of genetically determined disease in the context 
of statistical data or a known familial occurrence of Principles of medical ethics
a disease, for example Down’s syndrome, Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy or cystic fibrosis. There is knowl- Several modern attempts have been made to encap-
edge about the genetic causation of each of these sulate the principles of ethical medical behaviour in 
conditions, and certain tests with various probabilities a series of simple statements. The Declaration of 
of accuracy are available to assess the risk for individu- Geneva (Box 4.2) represents a modern attempt to 
als in a family and for the risk that a planned pregnancy restate the Hippocratic Oath in contemporary lan-
might result in an affected offspring. Major difficulties guage. The International Code of Medical Ethics (Box 
arise in deciding whether to inform someone 4.3) was derived from these principles and restates 
who has been shown by genetic testing to be certain them in more direct terms. The Declaration of Helsinki 
to develop a disease in later life, for example (1975) sets out recommendations for the guidance 
Huntington’s disease. Such decisions should ideally of doctors wishing to undertake biomedical research 
be made before testing is undertaken at all. Even involving human subjects. The recommendations of 
when offering counselling about the risks for planned the Declaration of Helsinki are generally recognized 
pregnancies, similar difficulties arise. The social costs as relevant to the design of research protocols. The 
in terms of unresolved problems to individuals and UK General Medical Council’s duties of doctors are 
their families of offering treatment or prevention for listed at the end of Chapter 1.



SECTION 2
Assessment in  
particular groups
	 5.	 Women
	 6.	 Children and adolescents
	 7.	 Older people
	 8.	 Psychiatric assessment
	 9.	 Patients presenting as emergencies
	 10.	 Patients with a fever
	 11.	 Patients in pain



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Women 5 
Rehan Khan

Introduction In all consultations, you should describe the process 
that is about to take place and get an agreement or 

All medical history taking, examination, investigation verbal consent. This will include history taking, an 
and management plans are intensely personal matters examination, an explanation of the findings and a 
for patients, although their consent to such involve­ discussion of a plan of action which will, of course, 
ment is implied by their presence in the clinic or include an opportunity for the patient to ask any 
ward. In obstetric and gynaecological practice, intimate questions.
details must be elicited; this requires tact, discretion, There are different systems for eliciting a history: 
consideration and the maintenance of proper confi­ the one outlined below is comprehensive and is the 
dentiality. Women may have particular expectations author’s preferred one. It should, of course, be adapted 
of their doctors, and complying with these may not to the individual patient. For example, in a post­
be easy. A gentle manner and a genuine interest in menopausal patient with a urogynaecological problem, 
the patient help the development of a good profes­ detailed menstrual and obstetric histories contribute 
sional relationship. Allow adequate time, but it is little. In a younger patient, the history may be more 
essential to keep a sense of direction and purpose so related to menstruation, pregnancy and its complica­
that the important is quickly separated from the tions and sexual activity in general. As a general rule, 
trivial. You must be aware that there may be an the introductory part of the history should be taken 
expectation on the patient’s part that she would be using open questions to allow a broader response.
seeing a senior person throughout, so always be very Presenting complaint
clear about your status as a medical student or doctor 
in training. As with breast disease, gynaecological and This is a statement as to what the patient perceives 
obstetric cases are usually multidimensional in nature; to be the problem. As the consultation progresses 
the reported symptoms are experienced and reported and the relationship between doctor and patient 
against a backdrop of core aspects of the patient’s develops, it may become apparent that the real 
lay beliefs. Developing the necessary skills to gather presenting problem is something separate. Even so, 
and interpret the relevant information requires it is important to start with the patient’s chief concern 
considerable care, insight and reflection. as a way of building trust and rapport with someone 

who is likely to be anxious.

Gynaecological history History of presenting complaint
Take a detailed description of the presenting com­

The usual preparations for history taking should be plaint, with an emphasis on the timeline (when the 
followed: courteous introduction; a statement as to problem started and how it developed over time) 
your status as a student or trainee; and a careful check and the degree of symptomatology (how much the 
that you have the correct patient, that she understands problem is affecting the patient).
the language and seemingly has competence. It may In order to assess a woman’s gynaecological well­
be that the patient is younger than the age of com­ being, certain areas of focused questioning are needed. 
petence (16, or 18 if she is in care, in the UK), and Many students (particularly males) feel awkward 
awareness of this and its effect on management may taking a gynaecological history, but this is often 
be an issue. If a relative, such as a parent, insists on unnecessary, as women with gynaecological problems 
being present during the history, potentially sensitive will be expecting such questions. It may be helpful, 
questions may be reserved for a time when the other at least initially, to use pre-prepared direct questions 
person has been asked to leave the room, such in order to overcome this initial self-consciousness.
as during the examination. Sometimes, it is appropri­
ate to revisit sensitive issues at a future appoint­ Pain history
ment which the patient may feel more confident to It can be very difficult to know from the history 
attend alone. if lower abdominal pain has its origins in the 



46 5 Women ﻿
gynaecological, alimentary or urinary system. The Box 5.1  Some examples of direct questions around the 
principles of eliciting a pain history outlined through­ menstrual history, together with some points 
out this book apply in gynaecological practice. In requiring clarification
addition, cyclical pain associated with periods is 
typically caused by endometriosis, whereas pain that ■	 How old were you when your periods first started? 
was originally cyclical but later becomes continu­ (Menarche.)
ous is often caused by adhesions. In all cases it is ■	 What was the first day of your last normal menstrual 
necessary to take an accurate history of bowel and period? (Patients may recall the last day of the period 
bladder symptoms, as a substantial number of patients which is not contributory. Whether the period was 
attending the gynaecology clinic with pain symptoms normal or not is important, as sometimes vaginal blood 
subsequently turn out to have bowel pathology (e.g. loss may be that associated with an abnormal 
irritable bowel syndrome) or bladder pathology (e.g. pregnancy.)
interstitial cystitis). The two major gynaecological ■	 How often do your periods come?
causes of chronic pain are endometriosis and pelvic ■	 How many days are there from the first day of one period 
inflammatory disease, and in both cases the symptoms to the first day of the next? (It could be that the cycle is 
may be caused by the formation of pelvic adhesions. irregular; many women keep a diary of their menstrual 

periods and it is often helpful to see this.)
Menstrual history ■	 For how many days do you bleed?

■	 How many heavy days are there? (With these two 
For premenopausal women, a menstrual history is questions you are trying to gauge the level of menstrual 
mandatory. This can be done quite quickly with loss, so some estimate of the volume of flow is 
practice but is usually dependent on direct questioning. required.)
Menstruation (the cyclical loss of sanguineous fluid 

■	 Do you use tampons, pads or both? How often do you 
from the uterus) is recorded as the days of menstrual have to change them? (The use of both tampons and 
loss and the duration of the interval from the first pads together is termed ‘double protection’ and is 
day of one period to the first day of the next, for strongly indicative of menorrhagia.)
example 5/28. Medical and ‘lay’ terminologies 

■	 Do you pass blood clots, and if so how large are they? 
sometimes overlap confusingly in medicine although, (The second part of this question is difficult to answer 
in this context, the words ‘period’, ‘menstrual period’ without a frame of reference, and comparison to coins 
and ‘menstrual cycle’ can be used interchangeably of different denominations can be helpful.)
by doctor and patient alike. The aim of this section 

■	 Do you ever bleed through your clothes? Is the bleeding 
of the history is to establish if the patient’s menstrual like a running tap? (This is called ‘flooding’.)
periods are problematic and, if so, in what way. Box 

■	 Does the bleeding interfere with your usual daily 
5.1 shows some examples of direct questions around activities, e.g. do you have to take time off work? (This 
the menstrual history, together with some points is a very important question as it helps to judge the 
requiring clarification. In addition, Box 5.2 shows impact of the bleeding problem.)
several other questions are required in order to check 

■	 Are your periods painful? (Some assessment of the 
for bleeding problems not connected to periods. degree of pain is necessary here, e.g. is medication 

If the patient is post- or perimenopausal, the history used and, if so, what and how much? Does the pain 
taking should reflect this. Some examples of direct, stop you from carrying out your normal activities?)
focused questions that could be asked are the 

■	 Do you have any other symptoms with your periods? 
following: (This is an enquiry about premenstrual syndrome, in 
■	 Are you still having periods? or which a variety of symptoms can aggregate and then 
■	 When did you have your last period? disappear as menstrual flow starts.)
■	 Has there been any bleeding since your last 

period? (This relates to a definition of 
postmenopausal bleeding – generally defined as presence of blood, whether there is an associated 
bleeding 6 months after the last period, unless vulval itch and, if so, if there are other sites of itching. 
the patient is taking hormone replacement In women with an abnormal vaginal discharge, ques­
therapy, in which case it is important to tions relating to sexually transmitted disease naturally 
establish which type. Exclusion of organic follow but can be difficult to pose. If the patient is 
pathology is mandatory in this situation.) in a sexual relationship, ask about symptoms in her 

Occasionally, gynaecological conditions may be partner(s) and whether either (any) of them are 
associated with cyclical blood loss from the anus or aware of the presence of warts.
urethra.

Urinary tract and uterovaginal  
Vaginal discharge prolapse symptoms
Even if this is not the presenting symptom, it should Uterovaginal prolapse refers to a situation in which 
be routinely enquired about. If there is a troublesome the uterus ‘sinks’ or ‘slides’ down from its normal 
discharge, enquire about its colour, smell, amount, position in the body. Frequently a woman will notice 



SECTION Two
47

Women﻿ 

Box 5.2  Several other questions are required in order to Box 5.3  Questions to ask if a prolapse is suspected
check for bleeding problems not connected to 

■
periods 	 Do you have a feeling of something coming down?

■	 Does the feeling go away overnight or when you lie 
■	 Do you have bleeding between your periods? (If so, how down? (Symptomatic prolapse is gravity dependent 

much and when does it occur?) except in the most severe cases.)
■	 Do you have any bleeding after sexual intercourse? (If ■	 Are there occasions when you don’t make it to the toilet 

so, ask for an estimate of how frequently this loss in time?
occurs and how heavy it is.) ■	 Do you leak urine if you cough or sneeze?

■	 What form of contraception are you using? (In the last ■	 When you pass urine, do you feel you have completely 
two questions, it is first necessary to establish whether emptied your bladder?
the patient is in a sexual relationship; this requires ■	 When you are passing urine, can you squeeze hard 
additional tact. The pattern of menstruation may be enough to stop the flow? (Arresting flow mid stream is a 
influenced by use of various contraceptive methods good test of the strength of the pelvic floor.)
including the combined oestrogen/progestogen pill ■	 How often do you get up at night to pass urine?
(combined oral contraception, COC), the progesterone- ■	 Have you ever seen blood in your urine?
only pill (POP), injectable progestogens, various 
intrauterine contraceptive devices and newer 
progestogen-containing rings placed in the vagina.)

Box 5.4  Direct questions for patients presenting with 
pain on sexual penetration

■
a bulge (‘a lump down below’) at the introitus 	 How severe is the pain – does sex have to stop?

■
(entrance) of the vagina and may report urinary 	 Does it happen every time you have sex or only on some 
symptoms consequent upon changes in the pelvic occasions? (If intermittent, ask how often this happens.)

■
floor muscles that alter the angulation and therefore 	 Can you say if the pain is superficial (near the outside) 
reliability of the bladder neck. It is very unusual for or deep on the inside? (Typical causes of deep 
symptomatic prolapse to occur in women who have dyspareunia include endometriosis and chronic pelvic 
not had vaginal deliveries. If this appears to be the inflammatory disease.)

■
presenting complaint, the history can be explored 	 Do you have any other pains in the pelvic region other 
with carefully phrased direct questions (Box 5.3). than the one brought on by sexual activity?

■
It should be clear to the history taker if the reason 	 Is there any bleeding during or after penetrative sex?

for any incontinence is in part due to mobility limita­
tions, but a general enquiry should be made about 
the layout of the home and symptoms of cough or have been any abnormalities or treatments. The 
constipation that may lead to repeated increases in opportunity also arises to ask if any other screening 
intra-abdominal pressure. Where the history is not has taken place, such as mammography and chlamydia, 
clear or needs more objectivity, it is sometimes useful and what the results were.
to recommend a simple frequency/volume chart on 
which the patient can record her symptoms and bring Past obstetric history
to a subsequent appointment. It is inevitable that a gynaecological history will 

include a truncated obstetric history. This can be a 
Sexual symptoms sensitive issue, as medical and lay terminologies 
A full sexual history would not be appropriate at the regarding lost pregnancies can cause potential confu­
first appointment unless the history taker has specific sion and inadvertent distress. Spontaneous abortion 
training in this area. If you know that the patient is is no longer used as the medical term for a miscarriage, 
in a sexual relationship, it is reasonable routinely to and what many women refer to as an ‘abortion’ is a 
ask her whether she experiences or has experienced termination of pregnancy in medical language. If the 
pain with sexual intercourse (dyspareunia). Sometimes questions are incorrectly constructed, the boundaries 
the patient will present with painful sex on penetra­ of confidentiality can be breached if the history is 
tion; again, direct but sensitive questions are useful taken in the presence of a third person. No pressure 
in this context (Box 5.4). should be placed on a patient during this part of 

In addition, it is essential to ask whether the patient the history, especially in the presence of others, but 
has had any previous sexually transmitted infections, it is important to know the number of pregnancies, 
particularly chlamydia and gonorrhoea, which are their outcome (gestational ages and weights), mode 
associated with pelvic inflammatory disease. of delivery, age of the children, whether there was 

any infertility at any time and, if so, the details of 
Cervical cytology history any investigations or treatments. Direct questions 
A gynaecological history should always include details that may help assimilate this information are listed 
of any cervical smears, their dates and whether there in Box 5.5.



48 5 Women ﻿

Box 5.5  Direct questions that may help inform the illness or when planning the support of a child. For 
obstetric history instance, if the patient is the subject of domestic 

violence, a request for termination of pregnancy may 
■	 How many times have you been pregnant? (Be aware be considered differently or this may be relevant to 

that some patients may not indicate that they have had antenatal or postnatal care.
terminations of pregnancy.)

■	 What was the weight of the heaviest and the lightest Family history
baby? Few purely gynaecological conditions have a familial 

■	 How old were you when you had your first pregnancy? basis. In the context of infertility, it is important to 
■	 How old are the children now? or check whether recurrent familial conditions are 
■	 How old is the youngest and how old is the oldest? present, both on the patient’s and her partner’s side; 
■	 How old would he be if he had survived? recessive and autosomal dominant genetic conditions 
■	 Did you have any difficulty getting pregnant? are often known to patients.

Past gynaecological history
With the passage of time, many patients forget certain Gynaecological examination
aspects of their past medical history (e.g. tonsillectomy, Full awareness of the privacy of the examination is 
cataract removal). Women with a gynaecological mandatory. A chaperone should be present during 
history do not often forget, so a simple question any intimate examination (breast or pelvic examina­
‘Have you had any gynaecological problems or tion) whether the person performing the examination 
procedures in the past?’ is sufficient to establish any is male or female. General, abdominal and peripheral 
significant gynaecological background, which should examination can be carried out without a chaperone, 
then be explored. although it is preferable to have one present. Breast 
Past medical/surgical/anaesthetic history examination is not part of the gynaecological assess­

ment in UK practice unless there is a specific complaint 
In order to get a broad view of the patient’s medical related to the breasts. It is important to ensure that 
background, you could ask a simple question such the patient gets undressed in privacy without the 
as ‘Is there anything in your past medical or surgical doctor or student present, and that she has a suitable 
history that I should know about?’ This is a helpful covering for the lower half of her body.
introductory question which can be followed by more For a new consultation, a general examination is 
focused enquiry depending on the case. For example, necessary and particularly relevant if an anaesthetic 
complicated appendicitis may be related to infertility; is anticipated. Details of the general physical examina­
or a previous blood transfusion, which has produced tion are covered in other chapters. In the context of 
blood group antibodies, may be related to subsequent gynaecology, measurements of height and weight 
pregnancy loss. If an anaesthetic is anticipated as part (giving the body mass index, BMI) and an assessment 
of the patient’s management, it is important to make of body proportions (e.g. general or central obesity) 
an assessment as to whether this is likely to be are important. In ‘gynaecological endocrinological’ 
problematic. Ask if she has had an anaesthetic in the cases, the presence or absence of signs associated 
recent past and whether there were any problems with hyperandrogenaemia (hirsutism, male pattern 
with it. baldness, acne, increased muscle bulk) should be 

Medication or treatment history documented.

These are standard enquiries and may be contributory. 
An awareness of medications taken in the past, with Abdominal examination
their success or failure, is a useful observation. Be The system of examination described in Chapter 14 
aware that patients may take various kinds of sup­ is recommended but should focus on inspection and 
plements which they do not regard as medicines, but palpation; percussion and auscultation are less 
which may affect gynaecological health, for example important in gynaecological practice. The presence 
Chinese herbal remedies, agnus castus, black cohosh. or absence of scars should be noted. Laparoscopic 
Allergic reactions should be recorded and clearly scars can be subtle, particularly if tucked within the 
displayed. umbilicus. Occasionally (usually to avoid the risk of 

perforation through adhesions in the lower abdomen) 
Social history the entry point for laparoscopic surgery may be via 
Enquiry as to occupational history, present and past, Palmer’s point in the mid-clavicular line, under the 
is appropriate. Even during the course of the relatively rib cage. Transverse suprapubic (Pfannenstiel’s) inci­
short time to take a history, a picture of the patient sions may also be difficult to see in the suprapubic 
may emerge indicating how well adjusted she is to crease unless specifically looked for.
her life, her relationships and external influences. Suprapubic examination is particularly important 
These may affect her prospects for recovery from as a gynaecological mass arises out of the pelvis and 



SECTION Two
49

Women﻿ 

Xiphisternum

36 weeks

30 weeks

24 weeks

16–18 weeks

14 weeks

Pubic symphysis

Figure 5.1  Approximate fundal height with changing gestation. Figure 5.2  Equipment for the gynaecological examination. 

the examining hand cannot get below it. Do this part 
of the abdominal palpation with the ulnar border of 
the left hand, starting at or around the umbilicus, 
and work your way down. When an abdomino-pelvic 
mass is present, its characteristics and size, either in 
centimetres measured from the symphysis pubis 
upwards or estimated as weeks’ gestation of an 
equivalent-size pregnancy, are recorded (see Fig. 5.1). 
Note its consistency (hard if a fibroid, usually soft if 
a pregnancy), regularity (subserosal fibroids and 
ovarian masses are usually irregular) and the presence 
of any tenderness. It can sometimes be difficult to 
elicit such signs if there is a scar in the lower abdomen 
or if the patient is obese. If nothing is palpable arising 
out of the pelvis, it is reasonable to conclude that 
any pelvic swelling is less than the size of a 12-week 
pregnancy. If ascites is suspected, check the supra­
clavicular and inguinal lymph nodes and look for an 
associated hydrothorax.

Pelvic examination
In gynaecology, pelvic examination (PE) is usually Figure 5.3  Discharge due to Chlamydia trachomatis. 
undertaken vaginally but it may also be performed 
rectally. The instruments used are shown in Fig. 5.2. 
PE should always be preceded by abdominal examina­ accommodate two). Generally, but not always, a 
tion. In order to reduce patient anxiety it is crucial speculum examination precedes the digital examina­
to explain every step sensitively but clearly. Medical tion (if it is important to visualize any discharge, take 
students should only undertake a PE in the presence swabs or take a cervical smear, the speculum should 
of a supervisor; the same applies to trainees in always be passed first; Fig. 5.3). In the event of the 
gynaecology, except where specific permission has patient experiencing undue discomfort (be it speculum 
been granted by the trainer. In many centres, students or digital), the examination should cease immediately. 
begin to learn the technique of PE using artificial Make note of any inflammation, swelling, soreness, 
manikins and models. ulceration or neoplasia of the vulva, perineum or 

PE commences with inspection of the perineum anus (Fig. 5.4). Women from certain communities 
in the dorsal or left lateral position and is followed may have been circumcised in childhood: this is 
by internal digital examination, using the index and known as female genital mutilation (FGM) and can 
middle fingers (use one finger if the vagina does not range from scarring of the labia to removal of the 



50 5 Women ﻿
of masses. The cervix is then identified; it is approxi­
mately 3 cm in diameter, with a variably sized and 
shaped dimple in the middle, the cervical os. When 
the uterus is anteflexed and anteverted, the os is 

Mons pubis
normally directed posteriorly. A retroverted uterus 
means the uterus is tipped backwards so that it aims 

Clitoris towards the rectum instead of forward towards the 
belly. The consistency of the cervix is firm and its 

Labia 
minora shape is irregular when scarred. Increased hardness 

of the cervix may be caused by fibrosis or carcinoma. 
External As a ‘soft’ cervix indicates the possibility of pregnancy, 
urethral even greater caution and gentleness is necessary. The 
orifice mobility of the cervix is usually 1-2 cm in all direc­
Vaginal tions, and testing this movement should produce only 
cavity mild discomfort. If the cervix is moved when there 

is pelvic inflammation, particularly in association 
Hymenal with ectopic pregnancy, extreme pain (cervical excita­
remnants tion) results.

It is possible to estimate the size, shape, position, 
consistency and regularity of the uterus and the 

Figure 5.4  The vulva. relationship of the fundus of the uterus to the cervix 
(flexion). Uterine size is generally described as normal, 
bulky or in terms of weeks of gestation (e.g. 6 weeks, 

external genitalia. Small warts (condylomata acumi­ 8 weeks, 10 weeks size, etc.) even in the absence of 
nata) appearing as papillary growths may occur pregnancy. Its mobility and shape (symmetrical or 
scattered over the vulva; these are due to infection non-symmetrical) may be assessed and the ovaries 
with the human papilloma virus (HPV). Inspect the and fallopian tubes (also known as the adnexae) 
clitoris and urethra and ask the patient to strain and palpated, although these can be difficult to feel in 
then cough to demonstrate any uterovaginal prolapse healthy women. Aside from the ovaries in some 
or stress incontinence. (Fig. 5.5 shows the various women, no other swellings should be palpable about 
types of prolapse.) If the patient has given a history the uterus in women of reproductive years. However, 
of involuntary incontinence, it is important that the adnexal tenderness is an important finding. The pouch 
bladder is reasonably full and that more than one of Douglas is then explored through the posterior 
substantial cough is taken, as the first cough frequently fornix via the arch formed by the uterosacral ligaments 
fails to demonstrate leakage of urine. It is kind to and the cervix.
press on the anus with a tissue or swab to reduce 
the risk of involuntary flatus, indicating to the patient 
the reason for doing so. Pelvic examination in special 

For the digital examination, disposable gloves are circumstances
used and the examining fingers should be lightly 
lubricated with a water-based jelly. With the patient Vaginal bleeding
in the supine position and with her knees drawn up In most cases, vaginal bleeding dictates that PE should 
and separated, the labia are gently parted with the be deferred to another occasion, but if a diagnosis of 
index finger and thumb of the left hand while gynaecological malignancy is suspected, then a PE 
the index finger of the right hand is inserted into the would be indicated in order to reduce the time taken 
vagina, avoiding the urethral meatus and exerting a to reach a diagnosis. As a general rule, consultations 
sustained pressure on the perineal body until the should not be cancelled because of vaginal bleeding; 
perineal musculature relaxes. Watch for any sign of the patient can still have a history taken, a general 
discomfort. The full length of the finger is then and abdominal examination, preliminary investigations 
introduced, assessing the vaginal walls in transit until requested and arrangements made to complete the 
the cervix is located. At this stage, a second finger examination.
can be inserted to improve the quality of the digital 
examination or, alternatively, a speculum can be used Cervical smear
if a cervical smear is required. The examination is Cervical smears can still be taken in the presence of 
continued with the left hand placed on the abdomen bleeding and, if the result is inconclusive, it can be 
above the symphysis pubis and below the umbilicus repeated. It is essential to involve the patient in the 
– the bimanual examination (Fig. 5.6). The hand decision-making process. The inconvenience of a 
provides gentle directional pressure to bring the pelvic repeat visit can be avoided if the smear is taken even 
viscera towards the examiner’s fingers in the vagina if there is bleeding. Patients who have had previous 
and serves to assess the size, mobility and regularity treatment for cervical neoplasia should not have 



SECTION Two
51

Women﻿ 

Rectum
Uterus

Uterus

Bladder
Bladder

Vagina

Cystocele

Cervix

Normal pelvis Cystocele and prolapsed uterus

Rectum

Pouch of
Douglas

Urethra
Anus

Prolapsed
cervix

Rectocele Anus Enterocele

Rectocele Enterocele and prolapsed uterus

Figure 5.5  In cystocele, there is downward prolapse of the anterior part of the pelvic floor, straightening the angulation of the bladder 
neck and leading to urinary incontinence. In rectocele, the posterior part of the pelvic floor is mostly affected, sometimes with associated 
faecal incontinence. In some patients, the whole pelvic floor is weak, with double incontinence or prolapse of the uterus. In enterocele, 
there is a prolapse of viscera from the pouch of Douglas as part of a severe pelvic floor weakness. 

follow-up smears cancelled because of vaginal clench her fists and place them under her buttocks. 
bleeding. This tilts the pelvis in such a way that the examination 

becomes possible. It is worth attempting this manoeu­
Examination under general anaesthesia vre if a cervical smear is required. In any event, a 
In some situations, it may be necessary to perform kindly and sympathetic approach by doctor and 
PE under general anaesthesia. The technique for accompanying female nurse is always necessary.
examination under anaesthesia (EUA) is the same as 
above, but additional care is needed to preserve the Intact hymen
patient’s dignity while she is unconscious and unable The possibility of rupturing or breaking the hymen 
to take an active part in the proceedings. during PE is an important consideration and is a par­

ticularly sensitive issue for women from some com­
Vaginismus munities. In such situations, judicious use of ultrasound 
This term refers to the reflex adduction of the thigh may often give the appropriate information.
muscles in response to an attempt at vaginal examina­
tion. In many cases, the examination has to be Pregnancy
abandoned, but mild degrees of vaginismus can Vaginal examination in pregnancy is discussed later 
sometimes be overcome by asking the patient to in this chapter.



52 5 Women ﻿

Bimanual palpation of the uterus

Palpating the uterus Palpating the lateral fornix

Right-handed clinician

Figure 5.6  Bimanual examination of the pelvis. 

Speculum examination
This is an essential part of a gynaecological examina­
tion. Several types of specula are available for use, 
including the bivalve type (e.g. Cusco’s) used for 
displaying the cervix (Fig. 5.7) and the single-ended 
or double-ended Sims’ (duckbill) speculum (Fig. 5.8) 
used to retract the vaginal walls. Occasionally, use 
is made of the Ferguson’s speculum, which may be 
required to inspect the cervix when vaginal prolapse 
is so severe that a bivalve speculum fails to provide a 
sufficient view. If a cervical smear is to be taken, care 
should be taken not to get lubricant on the cervix, 
as this can compromise the quality of the sample, so 
the taking of the smear before digital examination is 
good practice without using excessive lubrication. The 
speculum should be warmed to body temperature and 
lubricated with water or a water-based jelly. All the 
necessary equipment, such as spatulas, slides, forceps, Figure 5.7  Cusco’s speculum used to display the cervix. 



SECTION Two
53

Women﻿ 
by flexing the right thigh more than the left, and by 
hanging the right arm over the distant edge of the 
couch. A Sims’ speculum is inserted in much the 
same way as above, using the left hand to elevate 
the right buttock (see Fig. 5.8). The blade then deflects 
the rectum, exposing the urethral meatus, anterior 
vaginal wall and bladder base. Ask the patient to 
strain and note any vaginal wall prolapse. The level 
of the cervix is recorded as the speculum is withdrawn. 
The posterior vaginal wall can then be viewed by 
rotating the speculum through 180°. Uterine prolapse 
is called first degree if the cervix descends but lies 
short of the introitus, second degree if it passes to 
the level of the introitus and third degree (complete 
procidentia) if the whole of the uterus is prolapsed 

Figure 5.8  Sims’ speculum used to display the anterior vaginal outside the vulva. Vaginal wall prolapse occurring 
wall. with, or independent of, uterine prolapse consists of 

urethrocele, cystocele, rectocele or enterocele (prolapse 
culture swabs, etc., should be prepared before the of the pouch of Douglas). Several of these anatomical 
examination begins (see Fig. 5.2). variations usually occur together (see Fig. 5.5).

Carefully explain to the patient what will happen After examination, it is courteous to help the patient 
in the examination. Ask her to lie on her back with to sit up, offer her appropriate wipes (avert your eyes 
her feet together and knees drawn apart, as for the as she uses them) and ensure that she receives any 
PE. Separate the labia and then the introitus with necessary assistance when she dresses.
the thumb and index finger of the left hand and then 
insert the lightly lubricated bivalve speculum with 
the handle directly upwards, allowing it to be accom­ History relating to current pregnancy
modated by the vagina. When it has been inserted 
to its full length, the blades of the speculum are If a woman tells you she is pregnant, remember that 
opened and manoeuvred so that the cervix is fully some women may not wish to continue with the 
visualized (the left hand should now be free to do pregnancy so it is important to ascertain, as gently 
this; see Fig. 5.7). The screw adjuster or ratchet on as possible, whether the pregnancy is welcome or 
the handle is then locked so that the speculum is not. Remember too that whatever the woman’s initial 
maintained in place. Any discharge (see Fig. 5.3) and reactions, by the time of their birth most babies are 
the condition of the cervical epithelium, its colour, genuinely wanted. A review of the current pregnancy 
any ulceration or scars and retention cysts (nabothian can be made. Record the date of the first day of the 
follicles) should be noted. last menstrual period (LMP), with a note as to its 

likely accuracy. Ask about the menstrual pattern 
Taking a cervical (Papanicolaou) smear before conception and whether this was a natural 
This involves the technique of liquid-based cytology, cycle or due to the use of the contraceptive pill. The 
in which cells are obtained from the squamocolumnar expected date of delivery (EDD) of the child can be 
junction (transformation zone). A spatula placed calculated, assuming there has been a natural 28-day 
firmly in the cervical os and rotated through 360° or cycle for some months prior to the conception cycle. 
an endocervical brush may be used. If there is con­ The EDD is then 9 months and 7 days from the 
siderable discharge, with or without blood, the cervix onset of the last menstrual period (i.e. 280 days or 
can be cleansed using a cotton wool ball and a truer 10 lunar months; alternatively, the EDD is 266 days 
reflection of the cervix will result from the test. from the date of conception). In some cases, the EDD 
Taking a smear through a thick mucoid discharge should be altered at the time of the dating scan.
may result in an unsatisfactory smear. Samples for Later on in the pregnancy, ask about fetal move­
Candida, Trichomonas, Neisseria gonorrhoea, Chlamydia ments. These are usually felt from about 28 weeks’ 
and herpes may be obtained at the same time (see gestation (there is no set number of movements, but 
Ch. 17). The screw of the speculum is then released it is important to ascertain if the woman suspects 
and the blades freed from the cervix so that the that the frequency of movements has reduced). Ask 
speculum can be gently removed. whether there have been any unusual pains or any 

bleeding. Data are usually assembled chronologically 
Assessment for prolapse in 3-month episodes (the trimesters), as a healthy 
Assessment of the vaginal walls for prolapse or fistula normal pregnancy has different characteristics and 
is performed using a Sims’ speculum with the patient different problems occur at different stages.
in the left lateral position. The best exposure is given If labour is suspected, ask if there has been a ‘show’ 
by the Sims’ position, in which the pelvis is rotated (a brownish or blood-tinged mucus discharge), 



54 5 Women ﻿
breaking of the waters or contractions. If the waters as these can predispose to an increased risk of pre-
have broken, ask about the colour of the water. eclampsia and gestational diabetes respectively.

Relevant past obstetric history Social history
Here, a reasonably in-depth history is needed. The This has been discussed under the gynaecology 
course and outcome of previous pregnancies must history-taking section and the principles are very 
be explored and recorded, as these are an essential similar.
guide to the progress of the current pregnancy. Where 
early loss of pregnancy has occurred, it must be 
established whether this was by miscarriage, ectopic Presentation of obstetric cases
pregnancy or therapeutic termination of pregnancy 
(‘abortion’) and on how many occasions it occurred. It is common practice in obstetrics to present cases 
The gestation, symptoms leading to miscarriage, using particular language. Gravidity refers to the 
complications and any treatment must be noted. If condition of pregnancy, regardless of outcome, includ­
a termination has taken place, ask about the method ing the one being presented. It therefore includes 
used (e.g. surgical evacuation or medical management any ectopic pregnancies, spontaneous miscarriages 
with prostaglandin analogue), any complications and and terminations of pregnancy. Para (to bring forth 
the time taken for the woman to return to a normal or bear) refers to the number of deliveries over 24 
menstrual pattern afterwards. weeks’ gestation or under 24 weeks showing any 

The outcome of each previous pregnancy is recorded signs of life. Multiple pregnancies count as one delivery 
as a live birth, a neonatal death or a stillbirth. The only. Thus, a pregnant woman with one previous 
birth of a child showing any signs of independent healthy child and one previous termination of preg­
life is recorded as a live birth. This occurs beyond nancy would be described as gravida 3, para 1.
24 weeks’ gestation (or 500 g weight) but, with 
improved neonatal care, fetal viability may be obtained 
from an even earlier stage. If such a child dies, that Obstetric examination
event requires a death certificate in the UK. Also in 
the UK, a child born after the 24th week of pregnancy General examination
who does not, at any time after birth, breathe or 
show any signs of life is termed ‘stillborn’ and requires Again, this should follow the approach outlined in 
a stillbirth certificate. If the child is born dead at an Chapter 2. In obstetric practice, height and weight 
earlier gestation, it is regarded as an abortion or (and calculated BMI) are important. As a general 
miscarriage and certification is unnecessary. These rule, labour is more efficient if the woman is above 
are legal requirements. 152 cm in height, and hypertension, hyperglycaemia 

and anaesthetic difficulties are more common if the 
Drug/smoking/alcohol history BMI is above 30 kg/m2. Record the blood pressure 

(it should be 140/90 or lower in a normal pregnancy) 
As in the gynaecology history, these are all relevant. and examine carefully for oedema, not only in the 
Prescribed and recreational drugs (including alcohol ankles but also in the fingers (can she remove her 
and tobacco) may harm both mother and fetus. There rings easily?) and face. Breast examination is not 
is evidence that some medicinal agents (e.g. metho­ indicated unless there is a complaint related to the 
trexate, both maternal and paternal) have a teratogenic breasts themselves, although it is common for women 
effect when taken prior to the onset of pregnancy. to ask questions related to breastfeeding.
The effect is greater when the relevant agent is taken 
early in pregnancy (an embryopathy as opposed to 
a fetopathy; as a general rule, the former has much Abdominal examination in pregnancy
wider ranging consequences) and when in doubt, a Ask the patient to empty her bladder before the 
full history of exposure time, dosage and gestational abdominal examination. Make sure the light is good, 
age must be taken. the room comfortably warm and that there is 

maximum exposure of the area to be examined (Box 
Family history 5.6). Look for striae gravidarum (‘stretch marks’), 
At some time in the history, taking a genetic history linea nigra (a dark coloured midline abdominal stripe), 
relevant to both partners is required and explored previous caesarean section or other scars and any 
as indicated. Some couples may have had pre- visible fetal or other movements (unlikely before 30 
pregnancy counselling if there is a strong family weeks’ gestation but usually indicative of good health). 
history of a particular disorder. Specific ethnic groups Ideally the patient is examined semirecumbent. It is 
may have particular abnormal genetic predispositions not usually an uncomfortable examination except in 
and referral to a clinical geneticist may be indicated. certain pathological situations. If part of the examina­
It is especially important to determine whether there tion is likely to be painful, this should be left to the 
is a family history of hypertensive disorders or diabetes, very end.



SECTION Two
55

Women﻿ 

Box 5.6  Abdominal examination in pregnancy
Inspection
■	 Striae gravidarum
■	 Linea nigra
■	 Scars
■	 Fetal movements
Palpation
■	 Fundal height
■	 Fetal poles and fetal lie
■	 Presentation: breech, head, etc.
■	 Attitude
■	 Level of presenting part
■	 Fetal movements
■	 Liquor volume
Auscultation Figure 5.10  Method of abdominal palpation to determine fetal 

lie and location of back. 
■	 Fetal heart rate

and when equidistant from the xiphisternum and 
umbilicus, it is about 30 weeks. From 36 weeks, the 
fundal height is also dependent on the level 
of the presenting part, and therefore decreases as 
the presenting part descends into the pelvis. This is 
the phenomenon of a ‘lightening’ sensation experi­
enced by the mother. The height of the fundus above 
the symphysis is usually recorded in centimetres 
and, from 20 weeks onwards, the number of centi­
metres above the symphysis is approximately in 
accord with the number of weeks of pregnancy, plus 
or minus 3 cm, up to 38 weeks. This measurement 
is generally accepted to be objective and, importantly, 
is reproducible when different healthcare professionals 
participate in the same woman’s care. Common causes 
of deviation from these measurements include 

Figure 5.9  Magnetic resonance image of the female pelvis.  multiple pregnancies, multiple fibroids, maternal 
The uterus is arrowed. obesity, fetal growth restriction and excess or reduced 

amniotic fluid volume (poly-hydramnios and oligo­
Ask about any tender areas before palpating the hydramnios respectively).

abdomen. Using the flat of the hand as well as the Next, determine the lie of the fetus (this is the 
examining fingers can enhance comfort and gentleness; relationship of the long axis of the fetus to the 
this allows the outline of the pregnant uterus to be maternal spine – longitudinal usually, but sometimes 
delineated more readily. In late pregnancy, palpation oblique or transverse). To confirm the lie, the location 
may produce uterine contractions, which can obscure of the fetal limbs and back should be identified 
details of the uterine contents. Remember that, for (Fig. 5.10).
women in their first pregnancy, the abdominal The presentation (the part of the fetus that occupies 
musculature (particularly rectus abdominis) has not the lower pole of the uterus) can usually be deter­
been previously stretched, such that it is sometimes mined by abdominal palpation if it is cephalic (head), 
difficult to be sure about findings on palpation. breech (buttocks or feet) or shoulder (Fig. 5.11). 

The size of the uterus (Fig. 5.9 is an MR scan of Other types of presentation, such as cord and com­
a normal uterus) is traditionally estimated by the pound, cannot be determined by palpation. At term, 
fundal height (see Fig. 5.1), the distance from the over 95% of babies present by the head, but at 30 
symphysis pubis to the fundus (top portion) of weeks, because of the greater mobility of the fetus 
the uterus. This is a useful measure, even though it and the relatively larger volume of amniotic fluid, 
is only one dimension of a globular mass. In a normal only 70% do so. The breech can usually be distin­
pregnancy, the fundal height is just above the sym­ guished by its size, texture and ability to change 
physis pubis at 12 weeks’ gestation, at the umbilicus shape. However, an ultrasound examination may be 
at 22 weeks and at the xiphisternum at 36 weeks. needed to confirm this.
When the fundus is equidistant from the symphysis The presenting part refers to the part of the fetus 
pubis and the umbilicus, the gestation is 16 weeks, that is felt on vaginal examination through the cervix 



56 5 Women ﻿
Palpable level of the presenting parts in fifths

5/5                   3/5                 1/5

Pelvic inlet

Figure 5.11  Method of abdominal palpation to determine 
presenting part. Not engaged Engaged

Figure 5.12  The vertical relationship of the presenting part to 
(see vaginal examination in labour, below). The head the pelvic inlet (the level). 
may be presenting but the flexion of the head, or 
the extension of it, will govern what the presenting 
part is. In cephalic presentations, the smallest diam­
eters presented to the pelvis occur when the head is 
well flexed. Thus, in a flexed head, it will be a vertex 
presentation, and in a deflexed head, it will be the 
brow or even the face. Flexion of the head is termed 
the attitude. These observations are not usually pos­
sible to ascertain on abdominal examination. For a 
breech presentation, an equivalent assessment is made 
to determine whether the breech is extended (frank), 
flexed (complete) or footling (incomplete). Once the 
presenting part has a relationship to the pelvis, that 
relationship can be vertical (the level) or rotational 
(the position). When the flexed head presents, the 
fetal occiput is termed the denominator. When the 
face presents, the denominator is the mentum (chin) 
and when the breech presents, it is the sacrum.

The presenting part is said to be engaged when 
the largest diameter has passed through the pelvic 
brim. It is conventional to estimate the number of Figure 5.13  Listening over the fetal back to the fetal heart with 
fifths of the head that can be palpated through the a Pinard stethoscope (now largely historical). 
abdominal wall and this indicates its level (Fig. 5.12). 
Thus, if there are three or more fifths palpable, the 
baby’s head will be unengaged. If less than three-fifths Fetal movements, both as reported by the mother 
are palpable, then the baby’s head is probably engaged and observed by the examiner during the examination, 
in the pelvis, but this does depend on the overall size are noted. An estimate is made of the fetal size and 
of the fetal head and of the pelvis. Remember that volume of liquor by a combination of palpation and 
the pelvic brim has an angle of approximately 45° ballottement. This requires considerable practice. 
to the horizontal when the mother is lying flat. If Last, the fetal heart rate (FHR) (normally between 
the abdominal wall is reasonably thin, the unengaged 115 and 160 beats/min) is recorded either using a 
head can be palpated by the examiner’s fingers passing Pinard stethoscope (Fig. 5.13) or now more often 
round its maximum diameter (a manoeuvre known with a handheld Doppler device.
as a ‘Pawlik grip’). This means it is above the pelvic 
brim. When this does not occur, the widest diameter Vaginal examination in pregnancy
must be below the examining fingers, and fixity of 
the baby’s head in the pelvis is also a guide. This Vaginal examination (VE) is not usually recommended 
means it is engaged. Engagement will usually occur in early pregnancy. If there is bleeding or retention 
as the leading edge of the baby’s head, on vaginal of urine, it may provide useful information, but the 
examination, reaches the level of the ischial spines widespread availability of ultrasound scanning has 
(zero station). made diagnosis in this situation far less intrusive. In 



SECTION Two
57

Women﻿ 
the situation of a threatened miscarriage, it is more Box 5.7  Reasons for vaginal examination in suspected or 
appropriate to perform a detailed ultrasound examina­ actual labour
tion, even on the next working day if necessary, than 
to undertake a VE that may not be particularly helpful ■	 Is the cervix anterior, mid position or posterior?
and may lead to anxiety (and, possibly later, accusa­ ■	 What is the consistency of the cervix – hard, firm or 
tions that the examination contributed to fetal loss). soft?
Exceptions to this approach include a suspected ■	 Is the cervix dilated?
ectopic pregnancy with haemodynamic instability or ■	 Is the cervix effaced (thinned)?
the situation of considerable vaginal blood loss in ■	 What is the presenting part? Assuming a head/cephalic 
early pregnancy, in which it is important to quickly presentation, is the presenting part a vertex (posterior 
diagnose the presence of (and remove) the products fontanelle palpable through the cervical os), a deflexed 
of conception at the cervical os. Cervical smears are head (anterior fontanelle palpable) or, unusually, a brow 
rarely indicated in pregnancy, unless there is suspicion (supraorbital ridges palpable) or face (mentum or chin)?
of a cervical malignancy or one is required for follow- ■	 What is the station? The station is the relationship in 
up of known cervical neoplasia. centimetres between the dominator as above and the 

A case for VE can be made in the situation of ischial spine of the pelvis and is measured in 
possible cervical incompetence. This is a situation in centimetres above or below the spines – thus the depth 
which previous surgery or loop diathermy has led to of the presenting part is low when the tip of the 
thinning and dilatation of the cervix such that the presenting part is 2 or 3 cm below the spines.
weight of the pregnancy sac is too great for the cervix 
to withstand. The patient, usually somewhere between 
16 and 24 weeks into pregnancy, may complain of a 
small vaginal loss and irregular contractions. If the 
natural history is allowed to progress, there will be least 4 cm), the cervix should progressively dilate at 
rupture of the membranes followed by a short and a rate of at least 0.5 cm per hour.
painful labour, with subsequent delivery of a fetus 
(almost always non-viable). Scanning of the cervix 
in cases at risk has replaced these examinations to Investigations in obstetrics  
some extent but it remains a difficult problem to and gynaecology
diagnose.

A variety of investigations is available in gynaecological 
Vaginal examination in labour and obstetric practice. The principles of some com­

monly requested ones are described here.
Assessment of whether a woman is in labour is not 
always straightforward. A VE may help, but is con­
traindicated if there is painless loss of blood and/or Pregnancy testing
it is known that the patient has a low-lying placenta; Most pregnancy tests depend on the detection of 
potentially dangerous blood loss can occur if a VE human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) or its β 
disturbs a low-lying placenta. subunit in urine or blood respectively. As the chorion 

Vaginal examination in labour should always be produces increasing amounts of hCG from about 10 
preceded by an abdominal examination as described days postfertilization, pregnancy diagnosis is possible 
above, together with observation of any contractions, even before the first missed period. Urine pregnancy 
their intensity, frequency, length of time and whether test kits may be used at the bedside.
and how much pain they provoke. The VE aims to 
answer the questions listed in Box 5.7.

The Bishop score is an amalgam of the these findings Bacteriological and virus tests
(excepting the presenting part) at VE and is used to Bacteriological and virus tests used in gynaecology 
determine whether a woman is in labour. A low score and obstetrics include the following:
is indicative of an ‘unfavourable cervix’ (firm, posterior, ■	 Swabs from the throat, endocervix, vagina, 
long, closed cervix with a high presenting part). In urethra and rectum may be needed to diagnose 
contrast, a ‘favourable cervix’ is one which is associated sexually transmitted diseases (see Ch. 17 for 
with an efficient labour – anterior (easy to reach), more detail).
soft, open, thinned, with a low presenting part. ■	 Cervical scrape brush or liquid cytology samples 

By repeating abdominal and vaginal examinations for human papilloma virus.
at intervals, the diagnosis and progression of labour ■	 Mid-stream urinalysis (MSU).
can be ascertained. Vaginal examination is a potential ■	 Serum tests for toxoplasma, rubella, 
introduction of infection and can be unpleasant and cytomegalovirus and herpes simplex (TORCH) 
uncomfortable, so it is usual to not perform this more detect antibodies from previous infections and 
frequently than every 4 hours. Once labour is estab­ may indicate risk of congenital infection in a 
lished (i.e. the cervix is fully effaced and dilated at future pregnancy.



58 5 Women ﻿

Imaging Cervical length can be measured, giving an indication 
of risk of possible late miscarriage or early premature 

Ultrasound labour. Fetal anatomy surveillance can be carried out 
Transabdominal ultrasound enables a wide field of using ultrasound from 18 weeks, and if indicated this 
view, greater depth of penetration and transducer can include fetal echocardiography. By 20 weeks, 
movement. Transvaginal ultrasound, with higher uterine and placental blood flow can be assessed in 
frequency transducers, gives increased resolution and the form of a uterine artery Doppler test, which can 
diagnostic power but over a more limited area. More help predict risk of fetal growth restriction and pre-
recently, 3-D scanners have been introduced, and eclampsia. Ultrasound scans in the second and third 
these give improved image quality. trimester can be used to measure fetal growth velocity, 

In obstetrics, the integrity, location and the number amniotic fluid volumes, and Doppler examination of 
of gestation sacs can be viewed in early pregnancy. blood flow through fetal arteries can be used to 
By 11 to13 weeks, mono- or dichorionicity, nuchal ascertain fetal wellbeing.
translucency, nasal bone development and gross fetal In gynaecology, ultrasound is useful in the diagnosis 
abnormality can be detected (Figs 5.14 and 5.15). of uterine and ovarian pathology and in the assessment 

of bladder function, by measuring residual urine 
volume and bladder neck activity. It is also helpful 
in the preoperative preparation for repair of anal 
sphincter damage.

Computed tomography and magnetic  
resonance imaging
Computed tomography (CT) scanning has proved 
less useful in gynaecology than was originally antici­
pated and is now used mainly for staging and follow-up 
of malignancies. Magnetic resonance imaging, where 
available, is a better option (see Fig. 5.9). It does not 
use ionizing radiation and is particularly good at 
staging gynaecological malignancies.

Hysterosalpingography
Imaging the uterine cavity and Fallopian tubes with 
X-ray hysterosalpingography (Fig. 5.16) has largely 
been replaced by the contemporary technique of 

Figure 5.14  Ultrasound scan for early dating. hysterosonography (hysterosalpingo contrast sonog­
raphy, HyCoSy), in which the flow of saline or 
galactose microparticles through the tubes and uterus 
is visualized with a vaginal ultrasound probe, thereby 
avoiding exposure to radiation.

Endometrial sampling (biopsy)
Sampling of the endometrium is often diagnostically 
useful (Fig. 5.17). An adequate representative sample 

Figure 5.15  An ultrasound image with shading which gives an 
impression of three dimensions. Its use scientifically is not yet 
determined, but patients love it for the view it gives of their Figure 5.16  An abnormal X-ray hysterosalpingogram: uteri 
babies. didelphys (double uterus). 



SECTION Two
59

Women﻿ 

Figure 5.17  An endometrial biopsy curette, a pipette cell 
sampler and fixing medium. 

of endometrium can be obtained using a Vibra or 
Pipelle sampling system in the outpatient setting. 
The definitive assessment of the endometrium is 
usually by hysteroscopy and directed biopsy. With 
current miniature fibreoptic systems, this can be done Figure 5.18  Hysteroscopic view of an intrauterine device in situ. 
under local analgesia in an outpatient setting.

Colposcopy
Colposcopy permits visualization of the cervix, the 
vaginal vault (vaginoscopy) or vulva (vulvoscopy) 
with an illuminated binocular microscope to detect 
precancerous abnormalities of the epithelium. It can 
be undertaken on an outpatient basis, by accessing 
the cervix with a speculum, treating it first with 
acetic acid then with Lugol’s iodine. This aqueous 
solution of iodine and potassium iodide causes the 
cervix and the normal mucous membrane, which 
contain glycogen, to stain dark brown. Those areas 
of abnormality that fail to take up the stain can then 
be identified (Schiller’s test). The whole cervix is 
viewed through a colposcope, which gives binocular 
magnification, to identify the degree, site and extent 
of the cervical pathology.

Hysteroscopy
In this technique, the cavity of the uterus is viewed 
using small-diameter fibreoptic instruments (Fig. Figure 5.19  Hysteroscopic view of submucosal fibroids. 
5.18). Diagnostic hysteroscopy using a 4-mm hys­
teroscope can be performed as both an inpatient 
and an outpatient procedure for disorders such as bladder volume are recorded. Electromyographic 
abnormal bleeding and subfertility. This technique (EMG) activity in the external urethral sphincter 
can also be adapted with larger hysteroscopes to be and/or real-time ultrasound assessment of bladder 
used operatively for the resection of uterine adhesions, neck activity and descent may provide further informa­
polyps, septae, submucous fibroids (Fig. 5.19) and tion. In stress incontinence, urinary flow commences 
endometrium. at low bladder pressures because of sphincter 

incompetence; in urge incontinence, urinary flow 
Cystoscopy and cystometry develops at low bladder volumes because of unin­
The pressure/volume relationships of bladder filling, hibited detrusor activity. Reflux and overflow also 
detrusor and sphincter activity and urethral flow rate show as urethral leakage. Incontinence can also result 
can be assessed with a cystometrogram. The bladder from a defect in the anatomical integrity of the urinary 
is catheterized and slowly filled with sterile saline. tract, such as a congenital abnormality or fistula. 
The volume and pressure at which bladder filling is Viewing the interior of the bladder by cystoscopy 
perceived, and at which a desire to micturate is felt, gives information about its condition and allows 
are noted. The urinary flow rate and postmicturition biopsy of the mucosa or the removal of foreign bodies.



60 5 Women ﻿
a predictable way with gestation. For example, at 16 

Video/tv camera weeks’ gestation, increased levels of AFP suggest fetal 
spina bifida or anencephaly. However, similar levels 

Fibreoptic can be caused by several other conditions, including 
light source Grasping forceps threatened miscarriage, multiple pregnancy and 

exomphalos. Decreased levels are associated with 
Down’s syndrome. A computed risk of Down’s 

Pneumoperitoneum syndrome can be produced from maternal weight, 
gestation, parity and race, measured against βhCG 
and unconjugated oestriol, and the results matched 
against ultrasound findings. The ‘integrated test’ for 
Down’s syndrome predicts a risk ratio that depends 
on such a comparison. Alternatively the ‘combined 
test’ uses the same information plus fetal nuchal 
translucency at 11 to 13 weeks’ gestation.

Late pregnancy
Fetal health in labour can be estimated by checking 
for the presence of meconium, the responsiveness of 
the fetal heart rate and by counting fetal movements. 
In addition to these simple clinical tests, fetal pH 

Figure 5.20  Diagram of a diagnostic laparoscopy. measured on a scalp blood sample can be used to 
detect acidosis and is particularly useful if labour is 
prolonged, complicated or known to be high risk. 

Laparoscopy Once the membranes are ruptured, the fetal scalp is 
displayed using an amnioscope and a small sample 

Visualization of the pelvic and abdominal viscera is of capillary blood obtained from a puncture site. If 
particularly valuable if it can be done without a major the pH of the sample is below 7.2 then delivery is 
injury to the abdominal wall (Fig. 5.20). The abdomen an urgent priority.
is inflated with carbon dioxide under general or local 
anaesthesia, so that the anterior abdominal wall is Biological tests
lifted away from the viscera, allowing inspection of 
the abdominal and pelvic contents using a fibreoptic Although biochemical tests provide useful information 
telescope illuminated by a light source remote from as the likelihood of a problem with a fetus, biological 
the patient. Laparoscopy may be useful diagnostically tests are generally more specific and accurate. It is 
(e.g. in the investigation of pelvic pain or infertility) important before commencing these tests that the 
and therapeutically (e.g. sterilization procedures, woman’s attitude to the possible outcomes is explored. 
ectopic pregnancy, division of adhesions, treatment Detailed counselling by a trained professional may 
of endometriosis and hysterectomy). be required.

Chorion biopsy (chorionic villus sampling, CVS)
Tests of fetal wellbeing This is a method of obtaining chorionic material at 

9-13 weeks of pregnancy (usually through the 
Besides ‘standard’ tests of maternal health (haemo­ abdomen) so that the genetic constitution or bio­
globin, blood glucose, etc.), various investigations chemical function of fetal cellular material can be 
may be used to assess fetal wellbeing. In the UK determined. It is useful for the diagnosis of Down’s 
Hepatitis B and HIV testing is offered to all pregnant syndrome, thalassaemia and a number of other 
women, and particularly to those in known risk groups, hereditary conditions. Early and rapid diagnosis allows 
and may also be checked anonymously in order to the possibility of therapeutic termination of an 
obtain an estimate of the community prevalence of abnormal pregnancy, thereby increasing the safety 
these infections. and acceptability of that procedure. There is a small 

but definite increased risk of spontaneous miscarriage 
Biochemical tests after CVS.

Early pregnancy markers Amniocentesis
α-Fetoprotein (AFP), unconjugated oestriol, Samples of amniotic fluid may be used for the 
βhCG, inhibin A, PAPP A following:
These are normal fetal proteins or hormones that ■	 Chromosome analysis: amniotic fluid is sampled 
pass into the amniotic fluid and maternal serum. The at 13 to 18 weeks’ gestation and is currently 
maternal concentration of these substances varies in safer than chorion biopsy. The amount of 



SECTION Two
61

Women﻿ 

1 2 3 4 5

6 7 8 9 10 11 12

13 14 15 16 17 18

19 20 21 22 X Y

Figure 5.21  Multicoloured FISH. The FISH technique is 
‘fluorescent in situ hybridization’. The picture is not meant for 
detail but to show the overall multicoloured appearance of the 
specific nucleic acid sequences on metaphase chromosomes, 
which allows the antenatal diagnosis of Down’s syndrome, 
X-linked disorders, Turner’s syndrome, Klinefelter’s syndrome and Figure 5.22  Cardiotocography equipment. 
trisomies 13 and 18. 

desquamated fetal cells obtained is much Biophysical tests
smaller than from chorion biopsy, and cell 
culture is necessary, so chromosomal analysis is Fetal movements
not immediately possible. However, rapid In some cases of placental insufficiency, fetal move­
preliminary results can be obtained using the ments decrease or stop 12 to 48 hours before the 
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) fetal heart ceases to beat. In a healthy pregnancy, 
technique (Fig. 5.21). This test is mostly used fetal movements generally increase from the 32nd 
for prenatal diagnosis of Down’s syndrome and week of pregnancy to term. Subjective reports of 
other chromosomal abnormalities. reduced movements are likely to be more significant 

■	 DNA analysis: fetal cells obtained by than attempting to use a counting system. A report 
amniocentesis, CVS or cordocentesis (see of reduced fetal movements may indicate that 
below) can be used for DNA analysis of nuclear sophisticated and detailed surveillance is required.
chromatin in order to test directly for a number 
of genetically determined diseases in families Cardiotocography (CTG)
known to be at risk. DNA testing and 
chromosomal studies should only be carried out Assessment of the fetal heart rate and its variation 
with fully informed parental consent, and with with fetal and uterine activity can be recorded 
the help of a genetic counselling service. antenatally or in labour with ultrasound using the 

Doppler principle (Figs 5.22 and 5.23). A pressure 
■	 Cordocentesis: in this procedure, a needle is 

inserted through the abdominal wall and into transducer is attached to the abdominal wall so that 
the amniotic sac to obtain fetal blood from the variations in uterine activity can be matched with 
placental insertion of the cord. It is used in the ultrasound recordings. In labour, once the mem­
special centres when chromosomal abnormality, branes rupture, a more accurate recording of the fetal 
haemophilia, haemoglobinopathies, inborn heart rate can be achieved by an electrode attached 
errors of metabolism, fetal viral infections or to the fetal scalp (Fig. 5.24). The recording is triggered 
fetal anaemia are suspected. Although the by the fetal electrocardiogram. The information 
procedure carries more risk than amniocentesis, received may be further refined by computerised 
it is less traumatic than fetoscopy (which views analysis of the ST segment of the foetal ECG.
the amniotic sac contents directly) while still Ultrasound visualization
permitting rapid diagnosis.

Sequential real-time ultrasonic scanning to detect 
Non-invasive prenatal testing the presence of symmetrical or asymmetrical growth 

retardation or changes in fetal activity, breathing, 
Technological advances have meant that it is now movements, etc., can be used to assess placental 
possible to detect fetal nucleic acid in maternal plasma, function. If it becomes clear that fetal growth has 
and as this technique removes the risk of miscarriage halted or the child’s survival in utero is in doubt, 
associated with invasive testing, it is likely to enter then urgent assessment of blood flow by Doppler 
general obstetric practice once cost-effectiveness is and delivery with neonatal medicine support should 
established. be planned.



62 5 Women ﻿
240 Figure 5.23  An abnormal cardiotocograph 

Fetal heart rate showing late variable decelerations during 
uterine contractions with fetal tachycardia. 

120

30
100

Uterine contractions

50

0

Doppler blood flow
Studies of changes in the uterine circulation (uterine 
artery Doppler) may predict the later onset of 
pregnancy-associated hypertension. Changes in 
uteroplacental blood flow (absence or reversal of 
end-diastolic flow in the umbilical arteries) and those 
in the cerebral fetal circulation (especially the middle 
cerebral artery) and fetal ductus venosus give further 

Figure 5.24  Fetal scalp electrode. clues to the state of the fetus, or even imminent 
fetal death, especially in already compromised 
circumstances.



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Children and adolescents 6 
Anna Riddell

Introduction unusually noisy? Does the child seem well nourished, 
or wasted? What is the child’s interaction with their 

The skill of clinical examination is the true art of carer like?
medicine and nowhere more seen than in the examina-
tion of children. Children are not small adults and 
as such the approach to their examination is different. History
The examiner needs to be flexible, opportunistic and The history (Box 6.1) will normally be taken from 
able to tailor the examination to the individual infant, the accompanying carer, but an older child can be 
child or young person. In order to maximize the invited to give their version of events first. It is 
success of the examination, time must be spent trying appropriate to give an adolescent the opportunity 
to gain their confidence. During most of the examina- for a few minutes of confidential time during the 
tion the child should be contented and any discomfort consultation. Use this to ask questions about alcohol, 
minimized. Do not give false reassurances as this will drugs and sexual activity which young people may 
result in a loss of trust which will hinder the examina- be uncomfortable discussing in front of their parents. 
tion. It helps if the consulting room has a range of Even younger children should be asked simple things 
toys suitable for all ages. Younger children may be in words they can understand. Involve them by asking 
happier sitting on their parent’s lap. If old enough, relevant questions such as the site of the pain, etc. 
the child should be allowed to explore the room Remember that the carers are giving their versions 
freely. of the problem, not the child’s. Parents may also 

As the family enters the room they should be welcome an opportunity to talk in private away from 
greeted in a friendly manner and introductions made. the child, and it is often during such discussion that 
Adapt the approach according to the age of the child. the real reason for the consultation emerges. Always 
An adolescent may want to be the focus of the take notice of what the carers are saying, and listen 
consultation from the start. Younger children usually to their concerns. Any interruptions should be to 
will want to have time to observe and assess their clarify rather than try and direct the history. Make 
surroundings before being observed themselves. They sure they are given full attention and that they feel 
will often take a cue from their carer’s response. If their concerns are being taken seriously. All the time 
everyone relaxes and laughs in the first few minutes, 
the child will relax and the subsequent history and 
examination will be easier. Ascertain who is with the 
child. It may not be the mother or father but another Box 6.1  Structure to history taking in children
family member. Establish at the onset if you will 

■
need the help of an advocate to communicate 	 Presenting problem(s)

■
effectively with the family. 	 History of the presenting complaint

■
For the experienced clinician, much of the informa- 	 Previous medical history:

tion needed to reach a diagnosis for a child is gleaned –	 birth and the newborn period

from careful observation. While talking to the parent, –	 immunizations

watch and listen to the child. Assess their behaviour –	 specific illnesses, accidents, etc.

and use this information to adapt the approach. Does –	 development and behaviour (including milestones)

the child look unwell? Is the child interested in the –	 school

surroundings and exploring them, or apathetic? Watch –	 contacts and travel
■

the child running around: are there any obvious 	 Family history:

abnormalities in the gait? Is the face normal, or are –	 consanguinity and genetic risk
■

there features of abnormal development? Are there 	 Social history
■

any obvious physical abnormalities? Is the breathing 	 Drug history (including allergies)



64 6 Children and adolescents ﻿

Box 6.2  Pregnancy and infancy Box 6.3  General questions
■	 Did the mother have any particular illnesses or ■	 What are the child’s present habits with regard to 

infections, or was she taking any drugs during the eating, sleeping, bowels and micturition?
pregnancy (including alcohol)? ■	 What sort of personality does he have – e.g. extrovert, 

■	 Was the baby born at term? moody?
■	 What were the birth weight and type of delivery? ■	 Behaviour: anything unusual which the parent is worried 
■	 Were there any problems in the newborn period: about?

jaundice, breathing problems, fits, feeding difficulties? ■	 How does he get on with other children?
■	 Has the baby had any illnesses? ■	 How does the child compare with siblings or friends of 
■	 How was the baby fed? When were solid foods the same age?

introduced? ■	 School: which school, does he like it, academic 
■	 Were there any intolerances to food? achievement, does he miss much school?
■	 Was the weight gain satisfactory?
■	 What immunizations has the child had?

Family history
they are talking, keep watching everything that the Ask about parental age and consanguinity. Find out 
child is doing and his reactions. who are the other children in the family, with age 

The structure and focus of the history is slightly and sex, and who else lives in the family home. Find 
different from that of an adult. The core elements out if there have been any stillbirths, miscarriages or 
of the presenting complaint, a history of the present childhood deaths in the family. Ask if there are any 
illness and a history of any previous illness are the illnesses in the siblings, parents or any near relatives, 
same; however, greater emphasis will be placed on and if there is any background of inherited disease.
aspects such as the developmental history and less 
on the systems enquiry. Much of the key information Social history
will be collected in the history of the presenting Approach the social history with diplomacy; some-
complaint. Most children have a single system times it is more prudent to leave deeper probing to 
involved, and enough time needs to be spent evaluat- a later occasion in order to develop an initial rapport. 
ing this carefully. Consider the timing of the symptoms: The depth of enquiry in a paediatric social history 
do they tend only to occur at school? Are there any must always be judged on an individual basis. It is 
associating or triggering factors? Are the symptoms useful to know about living conditions and whether 
interrupting daily activities such as sleep, school either or both parents are employed. Who is the 
attendance, participation in sport or play? Is the main carer for the child? Is the child in any form of 
child’s perception of the symptoms different to that day care? If the child has been separated from the 
of the parent? Ask about symptoms from other main carer in the past or there is difficulty in the 
systems in relation to the presenting history rather parent’s relationship, this may be the basis of a variety 
than as abstract questions. For example, a child of behavioural difficulties. Is there a supportive family 
presenting with cough may be asked about symptoms structure involving other relatives, for example 
of gastro-oesophageal reflux which may be an grandparents? Has the family moved between or 
underlying cause for the cough. within the country frequently and how many lan-

In children, the previous medical history starts guages are spoken in the family?
from birth and specific attention should be paid to 
the pregnancy and newborn period (Box 6.2). Is the Examination
child fully immunized? This can be checked in the 
child health record, held by the parent, which should After forming an impression of the child, the family 
have documentation of child health clinic attendances, and their relationship, the examination can now 
weights, immunizations, etc. Enquire into the nature proceed. By now, younger children should have found 
and severity of previous illnesses and the age at which the occasion so fascinating that they will be prepared 
they occurred, for example common childhood to cooperate in most parts of the physical examination, 
infections such as chickenpox, admissions to hospital or they may even have fallen asleep. If the child is 
(in particular to intensive care), significant injuries now crying loudly, things will be difficult and strategies 
and accidents. Is the child taking any regular medica- to calm him down to allow examination will be 
tion or allergic to anything? It is important to ask needed.
about the child’s developmental progress: when did A key principle in the examination of children is 
the child first sit up, smile, crawl, walk and talk? that most of the information needed to make a 
Fuller details regarding the ‘milestones of develop- diagnosis will be gleaned from careful observation, 
ment’ are given in Table 6.1. Some useful general including listening to the child and playing with the 
questions are outlined in Box 6.3. child. Findings can then be consolidated with the 



SECTION Two
65

Children and adolescents ﻿

Table 6.1  Normal developmental milestones
Hearing and 

Age Movement and posture Vision and manipulation speech Social behaviour
6 weeks When pulled from supine to Looks at toy, held in Vocalizes with Smiles briefly when talked to 

sitting, head lag is not quite midline gurgles by mother
complete Follows a moving person
When held prone, head is held 
in line with body
When prone on couch, lifts 
chin off couch
Primitive responses persist

4 months Holds head up in sitting Watches his hands Turns head to Recognizes mother
position, and is steady Pulls at his clothes sound Becomes excited by toys
Pulls to sitting with only Tries to grasp objects Vocalizes 
minimal head lag appropriately
When prone, with head and Laughs
chest off couch, makes 
swimming movements
Rolls from prone to supine

7 months Sits unsupported Transfers objects from Says ‘Da’, ‘Ba’, Tries to feed self
Rolls from supine to prone hand to hand ‘Ka’ (babbling) Puts objects in mouth
Can support weight when held, Bangs toys on table Plays with paper
and bounces with pleasure Watches small moving 
When prone, bears weight  objects
on hands

10 months Crawls Reaches for objects with Says one word Plays ‘peep-bo’ and 
Gets to sitting position  index finger with meaning ‘pat-a-cake’
without help Has developed a finger– Waves ‘bye-bye’
Can pull up to standing thumb grasp Deliberately drops objects so 
Lifts one foot when standing Object permanence (knows that they can be picked up

an object exists even when Puts objects in and out  
it is removed from view) of boxes

13 months Walks unsupported Can hold two cubes in  Says two or Understands simple 
May shuffle on buttocks  one hand three words with questions such as
and hands Makes marks with pen meaning ‘Show me your shoe?’

Tends to be shy
15 months Can get into standing position Builds a tower of two Will say around Asks for things by pointing

without support cubes 12 words but Can use a cup
Climbs upstairs Takes off shoes often understood 
Walks with broad-based gait only by parents

18 months Climbs stairs unaided holding Builds tower of three Is beginning to Recognizes animals
rail cubes join two words and cars in a book
Runs and jumps Turns pages of a book two together Points to nose, ear, etc.  
Can climb onto a chair and  or three at a time on request
sit down Scribbles Aware of when needs the 

Takes off gloves and socks toilet but not clean and dry
Can undo a zip Carries out simple orders

remaining techniques requiring laying on of hands. their carer’s lap, as any attempt to get the child to 
Try to get down to the level of the child in order to lie down may result in distress. Always talk to children, 
appear less threatening. Ideally the child should be however young; do not be afraid of looking silly if 
fully undressed, but young children often do not like the result is a cooperative child. Those parts of the 
being fully exposed and children of all ages can be examination that are unpleasant should be left until 
modest. Older children will usually cooperate suf- last; if an attempt is made to examine a child’s throat 
ficiently to be examined lying down, and routine at the outset, the rest of the examination could be 
physical examination is similar to an adult examina- jeopardized. Offer the child something to play with 
tion. A younger child should be examined sitting on – even a stethoscope will be a source of amusement 



66 6 Children and adolescents ﻿

Box 6.4  Scheme for examination of children
■	 Face
■	 Head
■	 Neck
■	 Feet
■	 Hands and pulse
■	 Abdomen
■	 Chest
■	 Neurological
■	 Eyes and fundoscopy
■	 Genitalia, groins, anus
■	 Ear, nose and throat
■	 Routine measurements and simple clinical tests

to a young infant. Children often find it amusing if 
their toy is examined first. The scheme set out in Figure 6.1  Plagiocephalic skull. 
Box 6.4 can be adapted opportunistically, provided 
all areas are covered.

Always wash your hands before and after the There are many syndromes diagnosable by 
examination in front of the parent. This will inspire particular facial features.
confidence and show that you take infection control ■	 If the baby looks dysmorphic, then do not 
seriously. The examination techniques include the forget to look at the parents to correlate with 
usual methods of inspection, palpation, percussion any family traits. If the appearance is still not 
and auscultation; however, no set routine can be clear, ask who the baby looks like.
followed, and the examination is by regions rather ■	 Does the child have a large or protruding 
than by systems. The older the child, the more the tongue?
examination will be akin to that for an adult. Bear ■	 Are the ears in the normal position, or are they 
in mind the child’s age and level of understanding low set and abnormal in any way?
and ability to cooperate when planning the examina- ■	 Are the eyes small (microphthalmus)? Are they 
tion. Infants and younger children will need alternative set close together or wide apart (hypo- or 
strategies and adapted techniques to elicit clinical hypertelorism)?
signs. The examination may have to be opportunistic, Next note the shape of the head. This needs to be 
as each child will dictate the order of the examination done by viewing the child’s head from the front, 
by his reactions to various procedures. sides and from above. It may be small if the baby is 

microcephalic, globular if the baby is hydrocephalic, 
General examination sometimes with dilated veins over the skin surface, 
Note the state of nutrition. Are there any obvious or brachycephalic (flattened over the occiput), for 
rashes to be seen? Are there any naevi or other skin example in trisomy 21. It is often asymmetrical 
anomalies? Look at the colour of the child’s lips: is (plagiocephalic) in normal infants who tend to lie 
there cyanosis or pallor? Listen to the child. Are there with their heads persistently on one side (Fig. 6.1). 
any audible noises such as stridor, wheeze or stertor? This is now much more common because babies are 
Is the speech appropriate for the age of the child? placed on their backs to sleep in order to reduce the 
Has the child come with any pieces of equipment risk of sudden death in infancy. It becomes much 
such as a feeding pump or portable oxygen? Are less noticeable as the child grows older.
there any obvious devices to be seen such as a central Having gained the child’s confidence you can now 
venous line, gastrostomy tube or ventriculoperitoneal feel his head for fontanelles and sutures. The anterior 
shunt? Is the child interacting with the parent and fontanelle is normally small at birth, enlarges during 
with you as expected for his age? If not, why not? the first 2 months, and then gradually reduces until 
There could be a sensory deficit or a behavioural final closure at around 18 months. It can close much 
problem as a reason for this. earlier and has been reported as staying open in a 

few normal girls until 4 years of age. Delayed closure 
The head, face and neck may be seen, however, in rickets, hypothyroidism and 
Look at the child’s face and ask the following hydrocephalus. An assessment of the tension of the 
questions: anterior fontanelle is important. In health, it pulsates 
■	 Does it look normal? If not, try to identify and is in the same plane as the rest of the surrounding 

which features seem unusual and describe them. skull. A tense, bulging fontanelle indicates raised 



SECTION Two
67

Children and adolescents ﻿
intracranial pressure, but it does also become tense getting upset, and spend a few minutes trying to 
with crying. A sunken fontanelle is a feature of severe re-establish the previous rapport.
dehydration. The posterior fontanelle is located by The examination can now proceed to the rest of 
passing the finger along the sagittal suture to its the body. The arms can be examined in the same 
junction with the lambdoid sutures. It should normally way as the legs. Do the hands have a single palmar 
be closed after 2 months of age. Sometimes, when crease, as seen in children with trisomy 21 (Down’s 
passing the finger along the sagittal suture, a small syndrome)? Is there any clubbing leading to suspicion 
notch is felt over the vault of the cranium. This is of underlying cyanotic congenital heart disease or 
the third fontanelle and, although it can be normal, chronic lung disease such as cystic fibrosis? Are there 
it is seen in some chromosome abnormalities and in any limb abnormalities such as syndactyly (fusion of 
congenital infections such as rubella. While feeling the digits) or polydactyly (extra digits)? Feel the 
the head, any ridging of the sutures should be noticed, wrists for widening of the epiphyses of the radius 
suggesting premature fusion (craniostenosis). In the and ulna – a sign of rickets. Try to feel the pulse and 
neonatal period, the sutures tend to be separated, count it. This is best done at the brachial pulse in a 
and there is sometimes a continuous gap from the plump, young infant.
forehead to the posterior part of the posterior fon-
tanelle. Sutures close rapidly and are normally ossified The abdomen
by 6 months of age. Leave the measurement of the The abdomen can be a little difficult to examine if 
head circumference until near the end of the examina- the child is crying, which is why it is important to 
tion, as some babies find this a little threatening and have gained the child’s cooperation by this point in 
may start crying. the examination. Most infants and toddlers will need 

Having assessed the skull, the neck can be checked, to be examined while sitting on their carer’s lap 
paying particular attention to the presence of lymph (Fig. 6.2). It is sometimes possible to quieten a 
nodes. It is common in childhood to feel small lymph crying infant by placing him over his mother’s 
nodes in the anterior and posterior triangles of the shoulder and examining from behind. Small infants 
neck. They can persist for some years and change in can be given a feed to quieten them. Older children 
size in response to local infections such as tonsillitis can be asked if they would be happy to lie on an 
(reactive lymphadenopathy). Lymph nodes of greater examination couch.
than 1 cm diameter or rapidly increasing size may The examination needs to be structured along the 
indicate significant pathology and should be investi- three essential components of looking (observation), 
gated. Examination of other lymphatic areas can be feeling (palpation) and listening (auscultation). During 
carried out at a later stage of the examination – the the first 3 years of life, the abdomen often gives an 
inguinal nodes when the napkin area is checked, and impression of being protuberant due to the laxity of 
the axillary nodes when the chest is examined. In the rectus muscles. Causes of true abdominal disten-
young babies, the sternomastoid muscles should be sion are shown in Box 6.5. Look for any obvious 
checked for the thickened area known as a sterno- distension or for peristaltic waves (intestinal obstruc-
mastoid tumour. This is a benign lesion occurring tion or pyloric stenosis). Note the umbilicus and 
usually as a result of birth trauma but can lead to whether or not there is a hernia. Palpation should 
difficulties with neck movement and an abnormal be gentle initially. Always ask the child if his tummy 
head and neck posture. Torticollis is a potentially hurts anywhere and watch his facial expression during 
more sinister sign and can be associated with posterior palpation. The liver edge can be felt in normal children 
fossa tumours, vertebral osteomyelitis and urinary up to the age of 4 years; it can be anything up to 
tract infections. 2 cm below the costal margin. When enlarged, the 

The limbs
The feet need to be checked for a variety of problems, 
such as minor varus deformities, overriding toes or 
flat feet. It is helpful to feel the surface of the legs 
with your hands to detect muscle wasting or tender-
ness. Note any bony abnormalities and examine the 
movements of the knee and ankle. Feel for any swelling 
or warmth of the joints which may be suggestive of 
an arthropathy. At the same time, an assessment of 
the muscle tone can be made. This part of the 
examination may be made easier as part of a game. 
It is easy to notice at the same time whether the skin 
is dry or lichenified (as in eczema) and to note any 
skin lesions. All the time the child’s reactions should 
be watched. Is the child still friendly? Be prepared Figure 6.2  Baby sitting on mother’s lap while the abdomen is 
to stop the examination if the child seems to be examined. 



68 6 Children and adolescents ﻿

Box 6.5  Causes of abdominal distension Box 6.6  Reasons for a thoracotomy
■	 Obesity ■	 Lung surgery
■	 Faeces (constipation, Hirschsprung’s disease) ■	 Persistent ductus arteriosus repair
■	 Ascites (nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis) ■	 Pulmonary artery banding
■	 Gas (intestinal obstruction, swallowed air) ■	 Coarctation of the aorta repair
■	 Pregnancy in adolescent girls ■	 Blalock–Taussig shunt (also results in unequal radial 
■	 Distended bladder (lower abdomen) pulses)
■	 Pyloric stenosis (upper abdomen)

Table 6.3  Normal observation values at different ages
Table 6.2  Causes of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly  
in children Respiratory Pulse rate Blood pressure 

rate (breaths (beats per (systolic/
Hepatomegaly Splenomegaly Hepatosplenomegaly Age per minute) minute) diastolic mmHg)
Glycogen storage Sickle cell Leukaemia Newborn 40-60 140-160 65/45
disorders disease Lymphoma 1 year 30-50 110 75/50
Congenital Spherocytosis Mucopolysaccharidoses 3 years 20-30 100 85/60
infections Malaria Thalassaemia
Heart failure Alpha-1-antitrypsin 8 years 15-25 90 95/65
Haemolytic deficiency 11 years 15-20 80 100/70
disease of the 
newborn

the line of insertion of the diaphragm (Harrison’s 
sulcus) may be seen in obstructive airway disease, 

spleen may be felt below the left costal margin, and due either to asthma or to a nasopharynx blocked 
in infancy it is more anterior and superficial than in by adenoidal hypertrophy or in conditions leading 
the older child or adult. Slight enlargement of the to increased pulmonary blood flow. Look from the 
spleen can occur in many childhood infections (EBV, side for an increased anteroposterior diameter of the 
CMV). Causes of hepatosplenomegaly are listed in chest, which could be a sign of a chronic lung disease 
Table 6.2. Faecal masses can be felt in the left iliac such as cystic fibrosis. Thickening of the costochondral 
fossa in constipated children. They often feel like a junction is felt in rickets (rachitic rosary). Note any 
sausage which can be rolled underneath the fingertips. scars as a result of cardiac surgery. It is important to 
A full or distended bladder presents as a mass arising look for the thoracotomy scar under the arms or even 
from the pelvis. Deep palpation of the kidneys can round the back; otherwise you will miss it (Box 6.6). 
be carried out last. Although it would be logical to Sternotomy scars usually indicate the child has had 
examine the groin area at this time, it is often better major heart surgery involving valves or closure of 
to do this at a later stage. If the child has cried septal defects. Asymmetry of the chest becomes more 
persistently, it is still possible to examine the abdomen. obvious on movement (dynamic deformity) and may 
When the baby breathes in and the abdominal muscles indicate an underlying pneumothorax or empyema. 
relax, the abdominal viscera and other masses, if Look for any increased work of breathing. This may 
present, can be palpated. be indicated by seeing recession (intercostal or 

subcostal), tracheal tug or flaring of the nares when 
The chest breathing. The infant may be using accessory muscles 
Examining the chest in a child takes in both the such as the sternomastoids which results in head 
respiratory and cardiovascular systems. The basic bobbing. Count the respiratory rate (Table 6.3) which, 
structure remains the same, at first looking then in infants, must be done over a minute to be accurate, 
feeling then listening with the stethoscope. It helps due to periodic breathing. Listen for grunting respira-
to have let the child play with the stethoscope at an tion which is audible in infants who are attempting 
earlier stage of the examination to alleviate any worries to prevent alveolar collapse by creating their own 
about this strange instrument. Observation will give positive airway pressure. The grunting expiration is 
much of the information required for the diagnosis, followed by inspiration and then a pause.
particularly in younger children and infants. On Palpate the anterior chest wall for the cardiac 
observation, check for abnormalities which are fixed impulse and for thrills. In children under the age of 
and those which become obvious on movement. 5 years, the apex is normally in the fourth intercostal 
Static deformities in children include pectus excava- space just to the left of the mid-clavicular line. Midline 
tum and carinatum which are a source of great anxiety shift can be assessed in this way as palpation for the 
to many parents but are not usually of any clinical trachea in the suprasternal notch can be difficult and 
importance. Fixed indentation of the lower ribs at unpleasant for the child. Vocal fremitus is of less 



SECTION Two
69

Children and adolescents ﻿

Table 6.4  Chest signs of some common respiratory disorders of children
Disorder Chest movement Percussion (if carried out) Auscultation
Bronchiolitis Restricted, with hyperinflation Hyper-resonant Widespread crackles, or 

Often tracheal tug and subcostal recession wheezing
Pneumonia Rapid, shallow respirations with audible grunt Dull or normal Localized bronchial breathing 

May be reduced on affected side or crackles
May have no abnormal signs

Asthma Restricted with hyperinflation Hyper-resonant Expiratory wheeze
Use of accessory muscles, and subcostal 
retraction

Croup Inspiratory stridor, with subcostal recession Normal Inspiratory coarse crackles

clinical value the smaller the child. This is because Box 6.7  The five S’s of an innocent murmur
of difficulty with cooperation and the small size of 
the precordium. Expansion is also better assessed by ■	 Short
observation for the same reasons. The axillary nodes ■	 Soft
may now be felt in the same way as in adults. ■	 Systolic

Percussion of the chest is useful in older children, ■	 Sitting/standing (varies with posture)
but in young children and infants it is rarely of value. ■	 Symptom free
Tell the child ‘I am going to make you sound like a 
drum’. Percuss very lightly in babies, directly tapping 
the chest wall with the percussing finger rather than 
using another intervening finger. The chest is more 
resonant in children than in adults.

A stethoscope with a small bell chest piece is 
suitable for auscultation of the child’s chest. Do not 
use adult-sized chest pieces, as it is impossible to 
localize added sounds accurately with a chest piece 
covering such a wide area in a small child. Often it 
is less threatening to examine the back of the chest 
first, and much more information about the lungs 
can be acquired in this way. Listen for the breath 
sounds and adventitious sounds. Because of the thin 
chest wall, breath sounds are louder in children than 
in adults, and their character is more like the bronchial 
breathing of adults (puerile breathing). Upper respira- Figure 6.3  Attracting the attention of a 10-month-old baby while 
tory tract infections in children often give rise to examining her heart. 
loud, coarse rhonchi, which are conducted down the 
trachea and main bronchi (transmitted upper airway 
sounds) (Table 6.4). All is not lost if the child is children (see Table 6.3). Arrythmias are uncommon 
crying, as this is accompanied by deep inspiration in children unless they have had cardiac surgery.
giving an opportunity to listen for the character of 
the breath sounds. Neurological examination

When you are auscultating the front of the chest, The neurological examination can usually be carried 
the child’s immediate instinct is to push the stetho- out in the normal way in older children, but in younger 
scope away. You can ask the parent to hold the child’s children the extent of the neurological examination 
hands or try to distract the child with toys held in will depend on the child’s age and willingness to 
the hand (Fig. 6.3). It is a good idea to examine a cooperate. Although a great deal should have been 
doll or teddy bear first if the child is playing with learned already from initial observations, still look at 
one. The normal splitting of the first and second the child’s static and dynamic posture. Asymmetry 
sounds is easier to hear in children than in adults. may indicate a hemiparesis. A hypotonic child may 
Venous hums and functional systolic flow murmurs sit on his back rather than his bottom and an infant 
are often heard in normal children (Box 6.7). If the may display a ‘frog leg’ posture when lying down. 
murmur does not fit into this classification, remember Children with cerebral palsy may have a characteristic 
that most cardiac problems in children are as a result ‘windswept’ posture (quadriplegic) or have uncoor-
of congenital heart disease and not acquired as in dinated continuous movements (ataxic or dyskinesic). 
adults (Table 6.5). Count the heart rate in young If the child is walking, the gait should have been 



70 6 Children and adolescents ﻿

Table 6.5  Categories of key congenital heart disease lesions
Acyanotic (presents with hyperdynamic Cyanotic (presents with respiratory  Outflow tract obstruction 
circulation in heart failure) distress and cyanosis) (presents grey and shocked)
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) (pansystolic Pulmonary stenosis (PS) (ejection systolic Coarctation of the aorta 
murmur at left sternal edge) murmur at the left 2nd intercostal space) (pansystolic murmur at left 
Atrial septal defect (pulmonary flow murmur Tetralogy of Fallot (murmur of PS ± VSD and sternal edge)
with fixed splitting of 2nd heart sound) right ventricular heave)
Persistent ductus arteriosus (continuous Transposition of the great arteries (no murmur)
‘machinery’ murmur)

observed already. Look for toe walking (spasticity), Box 6.8  Primitive reflexes
wide-based gait (seen in cerebellar ataxia but normal 
in toddlers) and limping (antalgic gait or hemiplegia). Rooting reflexes
Hemiplegia may become more obvious on running On touching a baby’s cheek, he will turn his head towards 
as the affected upper limb is brought up closer to the stimulus. Sucking itself is a reflex, and failure of the 
the body. sucking response beyond the 36th week of gestation 

Note any abnormal movements. Tics or habit spasms suggests significant neurological impairment.
are repetitive but not purposeful movements, such Palmar and plantar grasp
as shrugging of the shoulders or facial grimacing. 
Choreiform movements are involuntary, purposeless A finger placed across the child’s palm or plantar surface 
jerks that follow no particular pattern. Athetoid of the foot will cause flexion and grasping of the finger. 
movements are writhing and more pronounced distally. Lost by 2 months of age.
Fits may be seen as lip smacking or flickering eye Stepping reflex
movements. When lowered vertically onto a hard surface, the foot 

Take the opportunity to check for spinal abnormali- presses down and the other leg flexes at the hip and knee 
ties such as scoliosis or kyphosis or any evidence of in a stepping movement. As this response is alternated 
spina bifida such as a tuft of hair. Be careful to pick from one leg to the other, the baby makes a walking 
up on any signs of a neurocutaneous disorder such movement. Lost by 2 months of age.
as café-au-lait spots or telangiectasia.

Coordination can best be checked by watching a The Moro reflex (see Fig. 6.11)
child at play. It is useful to have toys available that On dropping the head a few centimetres, the upper limbs 
require a degree of coordination, such as a toy farm abduct and extend symmetrically and then flex. Lost by 6 
or garage. Otherwise, a modification of the finger–nose months of age.
test using a toy held in the hand can be used. If the 
child is old enough, watching them dressing or doing 
up shoelaces is a good way to assess coordination. at them, which will check the 12th cranial nerve. If 

Check muscle tone if this has not already been the child can be made to smile, and even if he is 
done. Pick the child up if there is still a friendly crying, any asymmetry of facial movements can be 
relationship. This gives a good idea of the feel of a seen. If a child is able to bite on a wooden spatula, 
child and of the muscle tone. A hypotonic infant will the trigeminal nerve is probably intact.
feel as though they are slipping through your hands. Getting a child’s limbs into the correct position to 
Muscle power is difficult to check in young children test tendon reflexes may take some time. Often they 
except by watching playing habits and assessing power can be elicited by using a finger rather than a patellar 
by ability at a variety of lifting games. Always remem- hammer. Tendon reflexes in young infants tend to be 
ber to check for neck stiffness by testing resistance brisk, and up to 18 months of age the plantar responses 
to passive neck flexion rather than by testing for are extensor. The persistence of an extensor response 
Kernig’s sign. beyond the age of 2 years indicates an upper motor 

Testing of sensation is difficult in young children neurone lesion. Note whether primitive reflexes have 
and less likely to yield useful information. Unless persisted (Box 6.8) indicating significant neurodevel-
there is a strong suspicion of neurological disease, it opmental dysfunction.
is usually omitted. Touch can be tested by observing 
the reaction when the skin is touched with a cotton The eyes
wool ball. The eyes should now be checked. There are signs 

Testing the cranial nerves takes a little ingenuity. critical to other systems to look for such as pallor and 
Eye movements are relatively easy using a toy moved jaundice. Inspect the eyes for ptosis, conjunctivitis, 
in different directions in front of the baby’s face. cataracts or congenital defects such as colobomata. 
Young infants will often copy poking out the tongue Watch for spontaneous nystagmus or roaming eye 



SECTION Two
71

Children and adolescents ﻿
movements which may indicate a visual impair- descend into its normal position with increasing 
ment. It is very important to check for squints, as maturity.
ophthalmological referral is necessary, particularly in In girls, check the vulva for redness, soreness or 
an infant over 3 months of age. Squints are checked discharge which are commonly seen in vulvovaginitis. 
for by shining a light in the eyes from in front of the Fusion of the labia is not uncommon, so check that 
face and observing the position of the light reflex; they separate normally. Enlargement of the clitoris 
it should be at the same position in each cornea. A may suggest an endocrine disorder. It is important to 
cover test should then be used (see Ch. 20), using note that examination for possible sexual abuse should 
a doll or some other appropriate toy on which the be left to an expert. Check for inguinal lymph nodes 
child can focus his gaze. Pupillary accommodation and palpate the femoral arteries (simultaneously with 
and light reactions can be noted at the same time. the radials) to exclude coarctation of the aorta.
Examination of the fundus is particularly difficult Examination of the anal margin can best be carried 
in infants and will require dilatation of the pupils. out by gently separating the buttocks with one hand 
It should be possible to see the red reflex which, if on either side; the anal orifice can then easily be seen 
absent, is suggestive of a corneal, lens or vitreous and inspected for fissures which are commonly associ-
opacity, such as cataract or retinoblastoma. Usually, ated with constipation. Rectal examination is rarely 
enough of the disc can be seen to detect papilloedema. necessary in children and, if carried out, should be 
The testing of vision in young children is included in done with a well-lubricated, gloved little finger, which 
the section on developmental screening examination should be advanced very slowly.
(see page 78). In older children and adolescents puberty is assessed 

With the possible exception of the eye examination, using the Tanner stage (Table 6.6). This will involve 
nothing so far should have upset a baby unduly. The examination of the genitalia and looking for breast 
following examinations should be carried out at the development and body hair.
end of the consultation, as they are more likely to 
upset the child. The nose, ears, mouth and throat

The worst parts of the examination as far as the child 
The genitalia, groins and anus is concerned are the nose, ears, mouth and throat.
The nappy or underpants can now be removed if it The nose need only be examined superficially, 
is necessary to examine the groin or anus. In boys, looking for nasal patency, any deviation of the septum 
notice the penis. The lack of retraction of the foreskin or the presence of polyps or inflamed nasal turbinates. 
can be a source of worry to parents but it is normal Older children are quite good at sniffing, and this 
for it not to retract under the age of 5 years. Forcibly will give some idea of nasal patency.
attempting retraction is not only painful but can also A cooperative child will allow a look into his ears 
result in balanitis. Check the hernial orifices and see but, if not, the child should be held by the mother, 
whether the testes have descended. To feel the testes, as shown in Fig. 6.4. Held in such a way, the child 
make sure that the examining hand is warm and can be kept still long enough for the eardrums to be 
place a finger in the line of the inguinal canal; advance inspected. Look carefully for the light reflex, which 
the finger towards the scrotum. This will stop the can be lost if the child has chronic secretory otitis 
cremasteric reflex causing the testes to disappear into media (‘glue ear’). In acute suppurative otitis media, 
the inguinal canal, which tends to happen if the the drum may be bright red and bulging.
scrotum is approached from below. In young babies, The mouth and throat can be examined by encour-
it is not unusual to find a testis in the inguinal canal, aging a cooperative child to ‘show me your teeth’; 
but it can usually be pushed into the scrotum without an open mouth will then allow a clear view of the 
too much difficulty. The testis can be expected to mouth and fauces. If uncooperative, the child will 

Table 6.6  Tanner staging
Boys (external genitalia) Girls (breast) Boys and girls (pubic hair)

Stage 1 Prepubertal Prepubertal Prepubertal
Stage 2 Enlargement of scrotum and testes Breast bud stage Sparse growth of long, slightly 

pigmented hair
Stage 3 Enlargement of penis length Enlargement of breast and areola Darker, coarser and more curled hair, 

spreading sparsely over junction of 
pubes

Stage 4 Increased size of penis with growth Areola and papilla form a secondary Hair adult in type, but covering 
in breadth, scrotum skin darker mound above level of breast smaller area than in adult

Stage 5 Adult genitalia Mature stage Adult in type and quantity



72 6 Children and adolescents ﻿
the child is dressed, the examiner should sit with the 
parents and explain what has been found. It is always 
best for the child to have finished dressing before 
talking to the parents: they are more likely to listen 
and take in what you have to say if they are not 
worrying about buttons or shoelaces. Always involve 
older children in the discussion, as they have every 
right to know what you have found. Even young 
children can be given information in terms they 
will understand. Never under any circumstances 
deceive a child. The eventual truth will result in his 
losing confidence in you and with later medical 
attendants.

Signs associated with abuse/child neglect
During the examination of the child you may pick 
up signs which lead you to be concerned about the 
possibility of non-accidental injury or other forms of 

Figure 6.4  How to hold a baby to allow the ears to be examined. child abuse. These should be noted and considered 
The mother faces the baby to one side and holds him firmly, with as part of the differential diagnosis. Detailed definitions 
one arm around the head and the other around the upper arm and of the four categories of abuse (physical, emotional, 
shoulder. sexual and neglect) can be found in Working Together 

to Safeguard Children: March 2015 (HM Government; 
http://www.workingtogetheronline.co.uk/). Box 6.9 
lists some alerting features of abuse which will help 
you recognize if abuse is occurring. It is now recog-
nized that safeguarding children is everyone’s 
responsibility, however challenging that may feel. If 
you do have concerns, make sure you are aware of 
your organization’s policies and procedures and that 
you have someone you can discuss them with.

Routine measurements
Height and weight
Childhood is a period of growth, the pattern of which 
may be adversely affected by many disturbances of 
health as well as social deprivation. Serial measure-
ments of height and weight are therefore essential 
in the examination of children. In children able to 

Figure 6.5 stand, height can be measured against a wall-mounted 
  How to hold a baby to allow the mouth and throat  

to be examined. The baby faces the examiner, with the mother gauge. Younger children can be measured lying down 
holding him firmly with one hand on the forehead and the other on special measuring boards. Measurements should 
holding both arms. be made under standard conditions, and children 

should be weighed unclothed. If the child keeps any 
clothes on, this should be noted against the weight 

need to be held as shown in Fig. 6.5. Sometimes it so that subsequent weights can be taken with the 
is not too disastrous if the child cries at this point, child wearing the same quantity of clothing. Heights 
as this will give a very clear view of the teeth, the and weights should be compared with those of healthy 
tonsils and sometimes even the epiglottis. A spatula children of similar sex, age and build on percentile 
is a terrifying instrument to the average child, causing charts. Figs 6.6 and 6.7 show standard height, weight 
most to clamp their teeth shut. If this happens, the and head circumference charts for UK boys and girls 
spatula should be advanced to the back of the tongue from birth to 18 years developed by the RCPCH/
to induce a gag reflex. Look for the presence of the WHO/Department of Health. Other charts for body 
white patches of candida infection, ulcers seen in mass index (BMI), puberty monitoring and Down’s 
inflammatory bowel disease and the Koplik’s spots syndrome can be obtained from the RCPCH website.
seen in measles. Comparison should also be made against the 

The general physical examination has now been parents’ height by calculating the mid-parental height. 
completed. Hopefully the child is still friendly. Once This is done by adding together the height of the 



SECTION Two
73

Children and adolescents ﻿

Box 6.9  Symptoms and signs to help with recognition of abuse/neglect (from NICE guidance ‘When to suspect child 
maltreatment’ 2009)

Consider maltreatment Suspect maltreatment
Physical abuse Any serious/unusual injury with absent/ Bruising in specific shapes; human bites; lacerations 

unsuitable explanation; oral injuries; burns or on protected areas of the body; retinal haemorrhage 
scalds; lacerations without another medical explanation; bruises on 

non-bony parts of the body or face including the 
eyes, ears and buttocks

Emotional abuse Fearful/withdrawn; excessive clinginess; A combination of several concerning symptoms or 
overfriendliness; enuresis/encopresis; signs of signs
deliberate self harm; behavioural or emotional 
change that has no medical explanation

Neglect Severe infestations; dirty clothing/unwashed Cold injuries; hypothermia; medical advice not 
child; faltering growth/obesity; animal bites; poor sought; repeated reports of poor living environment, 
school attendance; unimmunized; failure to lack of adequate food
attend for developmental checks; dental decay

Sexual abuse Gaping anus; anogenital warts; anogenital injury; Persistence of anogenital symptoms or signs with no 
anal fissure with constipation; vaginal discharge; explanation; pregnancy in a child; hymenal injuries; 
persistent dysuria significant anogenital trauma; unusual sexualized 

behaviours

father and mother (cm) and dividing by 2. Add 7 cm Box 6.10  Causes of microcephaly and macrocephaly
for a boy and take away 7 cm for a girl. Plot the final 
value in centimetres at the final adult height line Microcephaly
(either at 18 years or 20 years depending on the ■	 Perinatal insult
chart used) to find the child’s expected final centile. ■	 Fetal alcohol syndrome
A child who fails to grow at an appropriate velocity ■	 Craniostenosis syndromes
(growth rate) needs to be investigated further. The Macrocephaly
term ‘failure to thrive’ is used to denote children 

■
whose weight gain is below that expected (fallen 	 Hydrocephalus

■
across 2 centiles on the chart). The child will need 	 Mucopolysaccharidosis

■
a very careful history and examination to be carried 	 Excessive brain growth (Canavans and Sotos syndromes)

out. It is important to pick up any markers of potential 
chronic disease. There are as yet no satisfactory growth 
charts for children of Asian origin born in the UK. As applies to height and weight, it is the rate of 
They tend to be smaller than Caucasian children at growth rather than a one-off abnormal value which 
least in the first few years of life; as a rough guide, usually gives cause for concern. Some causes of 
the mean percentile for an Asian child is the 25th microcephaly and macrocephaly are listed in Box 
percentile on the standard UK charts. Children of 6.10. Rather than using a chart showing the head 
African origin tend to be larger than Caucasian circumference alone, it is more useful to use one that 
children. There are special growth charts for children combines head circumference and length and weight 
with Down’s syndrome and Turner’s syndrome. percentiles, so that the proportions of each individual 

The meaning of the term ‘10th percentile’ is that child can be compared.
10% of all children in the measured population are 
respectively lighter or shorter at the age concerned. Blood pressure
Slightly different standards are applicable in different Abnormalities of blood pressure are uncommon in 
races and in different countries. Preterm infants should childhood and, because the measurement of blood 
be plotted according to their corrected age (chrono- pressure can be frightening and technically difficult, 
logical age minus the number of weeks born early) it is often only measured when cardiovascular or 
up until the age of 2 years. renal disease is suspected. An electronic monitor will 

be used in most paediatric settings as manual methods 
Head circumference can be inaccurate in small children. There should be 
In infants under the age of 2 years, the head circumfer- a variety of cuff sizes available and the largest cuff 
ence is a good proxy for linear growth and a much which will fit around the upper arm but not extend 
more reliable measurement than height or length. to the elbow joint should be used. The use of cuffs 
The standard measurement is the largest occipito- which are too small will give erroneously high readings. 
frontal circumference out of three using a paper tape. Doppler techniques more accurately measure blood 



74 6 Children and adolescents ﻿
14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

Preterm BOYS 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
50cm 50cm

0–1 year Age in weeks/   months 99.6th
49 49

98th
Birth 48 48

91st
Head Circumference 47 47

40 75th

46 50th 46
39

45 45
38

44 44
37

43

42 head 25th

9th

2nd
43

36 0.4th
42

35
41

99
.6

th 41
34

40 98
th 40cm

33 91
st

39 84cm
99.6th

75th
32 38

98th
50th 99.6th 82

31
91st 37 98th

25th 80

30 75th 36 9th 91st 78

29 35 2nd 75th
50th

50th
25t 0.4th

76

28 h 34
25th 74

9th
27 33 9th 72

2nd
2nd

26 32 70
Gestation in weeks 0.4th 0.4th

31cm 68
32 4 36 38 40 42 length

3
66cm 66

Plotting preterm infants 64 64
Use the low birthweight
chart for infants less than 32 62 h 62
weeks gestation and any
other infants requiring 99

.6t

60 h
detailed assessment. 98

t 60

58 st
91

Use this section for infants 58cm
99.6th th

of less than 37 weeks 75
98th 56

gestation. As with term 50th

infants there may be some 91st 54 25th 14kg
weight loss in the early days. 75th
From 42 weeks, plot on the 9th

52 13.5
0–1 year chart with 50th 2nd

gestational correction. 25th 50 0.4th
13

99.6th
9th

Gestational age 48 12.5
(7 weeks preterm) 2nd

46 12
Actual age 0.4th 98th

44cm 11.5
Gestational correction
Plot actual age then draw a 11kg 91st 11
line back the number of
weeks the infant was preterm 10.5 Some degree of weight 10.5
and mark the spot with an loss is common after birth. 75th

arrow; this is the gestationally 10 10
corrected centile. Calculating the percentage

9.5 weight loss is a useful way 50th 9.5
to identify babies who

Birth Weight 9
5.5 need assessment. 9

8.5 8.5

5 8 8

7.5 7.5
4.5 7 weight 25th

9th

2nd

0.4th
7

6.5 6.5
4

6 6

3.5 5.5 5.5

5 5
99.6th

3 98th 4.5 4.5
91st 25

th

4 4
2.5 75th 9t

h

50th 3.5 2n
d
h 3.5

25th 0.4
t

2 3 3
9th

2nd 2.5 2.5
1.5 0.4th

2n
d 2 2
th

0.4 1.5 1.5
1

1 Age in weeks/   months
Gestation in weeks 1

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
0.5kg 0.5kg

32 34 36 38 40 42 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

Figure 6.6  Height, weight and head circumference: boys aged 0-4 years. (© 2009 Department of Health Charts developed by RCPCH/
WHO/Department of Health. Reproduced with permission.)

UK - WHO Chart 2009      © DH Copyright 2009

Weight (kg) Head Circumference (cm)

9t 2
h 5

5
t 0

7
h 5 91 98 9 9s t 9t .

0
th t .h 4 2h 6 t 25 50 75 91 98 9

th t
n

h d h th th t s t
9

h t h .6th

50 7 9t 5
91 9

h t s
8

h t th
9.6th



SECTION Two
75

Children and adolescents ﻿
12 13 14 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23 25 26 27 28 29 31 32 33 34 35 37 38 39 40

2 Data Recording
552cm 11/2 21/2 3 BOYS Adult Height

124cm Prediction
99.6th

98th Birth Measurement
Age in months/   years

50 91st 1–4 years Recording Date
120

75th ft/in cm Weight
6.5

Head Circumference
48 50th

195

head Measure length until age 2; measure 116 6.4
25th height after age 2. 99.6th

99.6th Length/Height
6.3

9th 190
46 A child’s height is usually slightly less 112 Location

6.2 98th
2nd than their length. 98th

Health worker name
0.4th 6.1

91st 185
44 91st 108 6.0 Measurement 2

75th Recording Date
75th 5.11 180

42 104 5.10 50th Weight
Head Circumference

25th 175

40cm ht 50th
5.9

25th 100 5.8 Length/Height
9t

e 5.7

h ig h Location
9th 170

96cm 96 5.6 2nd Health worker name
2nd

5.5 165 Measurement 3
0.4th

92 0.4th 92 5.4 Recording Date
5.3 160 Weight

88 88 Head Circumference
Plot child’s

Length/Height
height centile on

84 99.6th
the blue lines

98th ngth
84cm Location

above; the black Health worker name
91st

80 le 30kg numbers show
75th

average male Measurement 4
50th

adult height for Recording Date

76 25th 29 this centile; Weight
9th 80% of children
2nd Head Circumference

72 28 will be within
0.4th

±6 cm of this Length/Height

value. Location
68 27 Health worker name

Measurement 5
64 26

Recording Date
Weight

60cm 25
Head Circumference

24kg 24 Length/Height
Location

23 23 Health worker name
99.6th

Measurement 6
22 22 Recording Date

Weight

21 98th 21 Head Circumference
Length/Height

20 20 Location
Health worker name

19 91st
19 Measurement 7

Recording Date
18 18 Weight

75th
Head Circumference

17 17
Length/Height

Location
16 50th

16
Health worker name

15 25th 15 Measurement 8
Recording Date

14 14 Weight
Head Circumference

99.6th 9th

13 13 Length/Height

98th Location

12 weight
2nd

12 Health worker name
91st 0.4th

Measurement 9
11 75th 11 Recording Date

Weight
10 50th 10 Head Circumference

25th Length/Height
9 9

9th Location
Health worker name

8 2nd
8

Measurement 10
0.4th

Recording Date
7 7

Weight
Head Circumference

6
Age in months/   years 6

Length/Height

5kg 11/ 1
2 2 2 / 1

2 3 3 /2 5kg Location
Health worker name

12 13 14 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23 25 26 27 28 29 31 32 33 34 35 37 38 39 40 41 43 44 45 46 47 48

Figure 6.6, cont’d



76 6 Children and adolescents ﻿
14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

Preterm GIRLS 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
50cm 50cm

0–1 year Age in weeks/   months
49 49

Birth 48 99.6th
48

Head Circumference 98th
47 47

39 91st
46 46

38 75th

45 45
37 50th

44 25th 44
36 43 9th 43
35 42 2nd 42

34 41 head
0.4th 41

6t
h

33 40 99
. 40cm

98
th

32 39
91

st

38 82cm
31 75th

99.6th 37 50th 99.6th
80

30 98th
36 25th 98th

78
91st

29
75th 35 9th 91st

76
28 2nd 75th

50th 34 74
0.4th

50th
25th

27 33
9th 25th 72

26 2nd 32 9th 70
Gestation in weeks

0.4th 31cm 2nd
68

32 34 36 38 40 42 0.4th
66cm 66

Plotting preterm infants 6 64
Use the low birthweight
chart for infants less than 32 6 length

4

2 62
weeks gestation and any
other infants requiring 60
detailed assessment. 99

.6t
h

60

Use this section for infants 58 98
th

58cm
91st

of less than 37 weeks 56
gestation. As with term 99.6th 75th

infants there may be some 98th 54 50th

25th 14kg
weight loss in the early days. 91st
From 42 weeks, plot on the 52
0–1 year chart with 75th 9th 13.5

gestational correction. 50th 50 2nd

0.4th 13
25th

Gestational age 9th 48 12.5
(7 weeks preterm) 99.6th

2nd 46 12
Actual age 0.4th

44cm 11.5
Gestational correction 98th

Plot actual age then draw a 11kg 11
line back the number of
weeks the infant was preterm 10.5 Some degree of weight 91st 10.5
and mark the spot with an loss is common after birth.
arrow; this is the gestationally 10 10
corrected centile. Calculating the percentage

9.5 weight loss is a useful way 75th 9.5
to identify babies who

Birth Weight 9
5.5 need assessment. 9

50th

8.5 8.5

8 25th
5 8

7.5 9th 7.5
4.5 7 weight

2nd 7

6.5 0.4th 6.5
4

6 6

3.5 5.5 5.5

5 5
75

th

3 99.6th
h

98th 4.5 4.5
50

t

91st 4 h
25

t 4
2.5 75th

3.5 9th
50th 3.5

2nd
25th th

2 3 0.4 3
9th

2nd 2.5 2.5
1.5 0.4th

2 2
2n

d
h 1.5 1.5

0.
4t

1
1 Age in weeks/   months

Gestation in weeks 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

0.5kg 0.5kg
32 34 36 38 40 42 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

Figure 6.7  Height, weight and head circumference: girls aged 0-4 years. (© 2009 Department of Health. Charts developed by RCPCH/
WHO/Department of Health. Reproduced with permission.)

UK - WHO Chart 2009      © DH Copyright 2009     

Weight (kg) Head Circumference (cm)

9t 2
h 5

5
h 0 75 91 98 2n 9

t 9
h 9. 0

t t th st 6
.

h t 4
h th d

th 25 50 75
91 9t s 8

9
th th t t

9
h h .6th

91 9 9s 8 9t th .6th



SECTION Two
77

Children and adolescents ﻿
12 13 14 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23 25 26 27 28 29 31 32 33 34 35 37 38 39 40

2
552cm 11/ 1

2 2 /2 3 GIRLS Adult Height
124cm Prediction Data Recording

ft/in cm Birth Measurement
99.6th

Age in months/   years 1–4 years 5.11
50 180 Recording Date

98th 120
Weight

91st 5.10
Head Circumference

48 75th 116
50th Measure length until age 2; measure 5.9

99.6th 175 Length/Height
h

height after age 2. 99.6t

46 head 25th 112 5.8 Location
9th A child’s height is usually slightly less 98th

98th Health worker name
than their length. 5.7 170

2nd 91st

44 91st 108 Measurement 2
0.4th 5.6 Recording Date

75th
75th

42 104 5.5 165 Weight
50th

50th
5.4

40cm 25th
25th 100

5.3 160
9th

9th
96cm 96

2nd

92 height Head Circumference
Length/Height

Location

5.2 Health worker name
2nd Measurement 3

5.1 155
92 Recording Date

0.4th
0.4th

5.0 Weight

88 88 4.11 150 Head Circumference
Length/Height

84 84cm Plot child’s
99.6th Location

98th height centile on
Health worker name

the pink lines
80 t

91s length
30kg above; the black Measurement 4

75th numbers show Recording Date
76 50th

29 average female
25th

Weight
adult height for

9th this centile; Head Circumference
72 28

2nd 80% of children Length/Height
will be within

0.4th Location
68 27 ±6 cm of this

value. Health worker name

Measurement 5
64 26

Recording Date
Weight

60cm 25
Head Circumference

Length/Height
24kg 24

99.6th Location

23 23 Health worker name

Measurement 6
22 22 Recording Date

Weight
98th

21 21 Head Circumference
Length/Height

20 20 Location

91st Health worker name
19 19 Measurement 7

Recording Date
18 18 Weight

75th
Head Circumference

17 17
Length/Height

Location
16 50th 16

Health worker name

15
25th

14 ght 15 Measurement 8
Recording Date

9th

13 99.6th

2nd
12 98th wei 14 Weight

Head Circumference

13 Length/Height
Location

12 Health worker name

0.4th Measurement 9
11 91st 11 Recording Date

75th
Weight

10 10 Head Circumference

50th Length/Height
9 9

25th Location
Health worker name

8 9th 8
Measurement 10

2nd
Recording Date

7 0.4th 7
Weight

Head Circumference
6 Age in months/   years 6

Length/Height

5kg 11/2 2 21/2 3 31/2 5kg Location
Health worker name

12 13 14 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23 25 26 27 28 29 31 32 33 34 35 37 38 39 40 41 43 44 45 46 47 48

Figure 6.7, cont’d



78 6 Children and adolescents ﻿
pressure in children, but these are not always available. a procedure which is not too difficult in infants as 
The blood pressure should be checked in all four the bladder sits relatively high in the pelvis.
limbs to exclude coarctation of the aorta when 
congenital heart disease is suspected. Normal values Developmental screening examination
of blood pressure at different ages are listed in 
Table 6.3. The developmental examination assesses the acquisi-

tion of learned skills. Development progresses from 
Temperature head to toe (a child needs to be able to hold his head 
The temperature should be taken if there is a suspicion up before being able to sit unsupported). Progress 
of an underlying infection or if there is a report from also requires the loss of primitive reflexes (see Box 
the parent of the child having been hot. Fever is a 6.8) at the appropriate age (a child cannot transfer 
very common finding in children and may be due to objects between his hands if he still has a grasp reflex). 
exercise and minor infections, as well as severe infec- Developmental progress can be affected by emotional 
tions and other serious illnesses. Small infants often difficulties, environment (e.g. lack of stimulation due 
respond to infection with low temperatures. to neglect) and illnesses.

The most common methods used in current practice All infants should have a simple developmental 
are axillary measurements using chemical dot strips, screening examination at regular intervals. Table 6.1 
or electronic devices giving tympanic membrane lists the important milestones. Detailed developmental 
readings. These methods are the easiest to use but assessment is a specialist subject, but it is important 
readings should be interpreted according to the for all those who examine children to be able to 
method used. For example, axillary temperatures are carry out a simple developmental screening examina-
0.5-1.0°C below core body temperature. Rectal tion, and to be aware of all the basic milestones.
temperature is the best approximation to core It is usual to consider development under four 
temperature but is seldom, if ever, taken. Febrile main headings:
convulsions may occur in children between 6 months 1	 Movement and posture.
and 6 years of age when the temperature rises rapidly 2	 Vision and manipulation.
to 39.5°C or above. 3	 Hearing and speech.

4	 Social behaviour.
Stools Screening for developmental delay involves testing 

the child’s performance of a few skills in each of the 
Never be afraid to see a dirty nappy or stool. This is four fields of development, and comparing the results 
part of the examination of a baby, and it is important with the average for children of the same age. The 
to know the normal appearance of stools in childhood. range of normal developmental progress is wide, and 
The stools of a breastfed infant are usually loose and the milestones shown in Table 6.1 are those of an 
have yellow seeds in them with a characteristic odour. average normal child. Delay in all fields of develop-
Infants fed on cows’ milk formulas pass stools that ment is more significant than delay in a single modality, 
are a paler yellow colour and more pasty. The character and severe delay is more meaningful than slight 
of the stool in older children is more variable than delay. Allowance must always be made for those 
in adults. Some healthy children pass frequent, loose infants who were born prematurely, at least until 
stools containing undigested vegetable matter – the age of 2 years, by which time they should have 
‘toddler’s diarrhoea’. The stools of children with caught up.
coeliac disease or cystic fibrosis are bulky, particularly By 18 months of age, obvious deviations from 
smelly and quite characteristic. normal development should become apparent. Beyond 

this age, developmental testing is more specialized, 
Urine and is beyond the scope of this chapter. A baby who 
Urine can be tested easily and reliably using modern appears to have delayed development on screening 
reagent dipstick methods, but collection of the speci- will need further specialized assessment to establish 
men can be difficult in the younger child. Specially the cause and subsequent management.
designed collection bags can be attached to the peri-
neum but these are prone to faecal contamination Techniques used
and should never be used to test for a urinary tract The same rules apply to the techniques used in 
infection. This should be done using a ‘clean catch’ developmental screening as to those of general physical 
sample specimen into a sterile bowl or other container. examination. As with all parts of the examination, 
Urine samples from children under the age of 2 years much more is learned by simply watching a child 
should always be double checked for infection in the play and watching his reactions to the surroundings. 
laboratory. Modern techniques use flow cytometry Time has to be spent gaining the friendship of the 
and results will be available within a few hours. In a child. For example, when offering a 10-month-old 
septic infant when a specimen is required urgently baby a small toy, watch to see how he grasps it and 
and an accurate diagnosis needed, the urine may be reacts to it. Let the baby play with the toys and bricks 
obtained by suprapubic aspiration of bladder urine, while sitting on the mother’s lap, and if the child 



SECTION Two
79

Children and adolescents ﻿
remains suspicious, get the mother to offer the various is unable to see. When he picks toys up, is accom-
objects. modation normal? The routine examination of the 

In the UK, routine developmental screening is eye has been dealt with in the first part of this chapter.
usually carried out by a health visitor who is trained Checks of visual acuity are not easy in young babies. 
in developmental skills and who will refer to a doctor By 6 weeks of age, babies should be following their 
babies about whom there is any suspicion. There mother with their eyes, and by 6 months they should 
is always an assessment at 2 weeks (the newborn be able to follow a rolling ball at 3 metres. This is 
review), 6-8 weeks, 9-12 months and 2 and a half years the basis of one method of visual testing at this age. 
of age. If at any point concerns are raised, then the The ability of the child to follow rolling balls of 
child will be referred to a specialist community team differing diameters gives an accurate assessment of 
for further assessment. Once at school age, the school visual acuity. At the 8-month check, the baby should 
nursing team supports their health and development. be able to see and pick up an object the size of a 

raisin at arm’s length. From the age of approximately 
Head control 2 years, the Sheridan-Gardiner test is used. This is a 
By 4 months, babies can normally keep their head simple comparison test, with the examiner indicating 
in line with the trunk when pulled from supine to letters or familiar toys on a board and asking the 
sitting and, when held in the sitting position, will child to indicate a similar object on a board held by 
keep their head upright. Before this age, the head the mother. The acuity is the ability of the child to 
lags behind the trunk (Figs 6.8 and 6.9). pick out the smallest objects (see Ch. 20).

Testing vision Testing hearing
Much will be learned about a child’s vision by observa- In the past, it was usual to check the hearing for the 
tion. Note whether the child is looking around the first time between 6 and 8 months of age using the 
room and at particular toys, or staring at nothing in distraction test (Fig. 6.10). This can still be used as 
particular, especially if there are random or nystagmoid a screening method but has a large observer error 
eye movements, the latter suggesting that the child and has largely been replaced by a national screening 

programme for all newborn babies, based on oto
acoustic emissions. This measures vibration reflected 
from the normally functioning cochlea. Additionally, 
brainstem auditory evoked potentials are used to 
assess the more vulnerable babies with the risk factors 
detailed in Box 6.11. This measures electrical activity 
in the baby’s brain in response to sound. Audiometry 
and tympanometry are methods used in older children 

Figure 6.8  Head control at 6 weeks of age. 

Figure 6.10  Testing hearing at 8 months: the child is held 
upright and forward on his parent’s lap and distracted by an 
examiner in front of him. An examiner then presents sounds at 
35 dB at different frequencies behind him and observes if the 

Figure 6.9  Head control at 4 months of age. child turns towards the direction of the sound. 



80 6 Children and adolescents ﻿

Box 6.11  Risk factors for hearing impairment Box 6.13  Checklist for examination of the newborn
■	 Family history of deafness ■	 Weight, length, head circumference
■	 Congenital malformations (particularly ear, facial and ■	 Alertness and wakefulness

spinal) ■	 Skin colour: cyanosis, jaundice, birth marks
■	 Congenital infections (rubella, cytomegalovirus) ■	 Face: ears, dysmorphic features
■	 Perinatal illness (gestation below 32 weeks at birth, low ■	 Head: skull and fontanelles

birth weight, jaundice) ■	 Eyes: red reflex
■	 Postnatal illness (meningitis) ■	 Mouth and tongue

■	 Neck: branchial cysts
■	 Limbs: digits and palmar creases, talipes
■	 Chest: murmurs

Box 6.12  The Apgar score
■	 Abdomen and umbilicus

In each of the five categories, a score of 0, 1 or 2 is ■	 Perineum and genitalia
awarded, to give a maximum of 10. A score of 7-10 is good, ■	 Spine: sacral development
3-6 is moderate CNS depression and 0-2 is severe CNS ■	 Neurological assessment: posture, movements and tone, 
depression: reflexes, the cry
■	 Heart rate ■	 Hips
■	 Respiratory effort
■	 Muscle tone
■	 Reflex irritability noting the state of awareness. If the baby is awake, 
■	 Colour seemingly looking around and not crying, take 

the opportunity to examine the nervous system at 
this point.

who can cooperate with the tests. They are useful The skin
for detecting middle-ear disease or glue ear which 
is more common in this group of children (see Note the colour of the skin. Peripheral cyanosis is a 
Ch. 21). common finding in the normal newborn, but central 

cyanosis may indicate the presence of cardiac or 
Examination of the newborn respiratory disease. The head and neck may appear 

plethoric due to confluent petechial haemorrhages 
The Apgar score (Box 6.12) is a combined cardiores- as a result of prolonged or obstructed labour. Jaundice 
piratory and neurological score used immediately is common after 48 hours in most preterm and some 
after birth and will be the first assessment a baby term babies and is considered physiological. Any baby 
will have in his life. An Apgar score of 6 or less at 5 jaundiced before 48 hours or after 7 days of age 
minutes after birth is associated with neurological needs to be investigated. The commonest cause is 
deficit in about 10% of cases. Assessment of gestational haemolytic disease of the newborn due to ABO blood 
age can be carried out clinically using the Dubowitz group incompatibility.
score (not detailed here). With more reliable dating Look for birthmarks, which are either pigmented 
scans, this method of assessment is rarely used now. lesions or haemangiomata. Many babies have a col-

Every newborn baby is examined within the first lection of dilated capillaries on the upper eyelids and 
24 hours of life and again before the end of the first nape of the neck (sometimes called ‘stork bites’), 
week. This is a very important examination designed which fade after a few weeks. Some babies develop 
to assess the general state of health and to detect a crop of small erythematous papules with a sur-
congenital abnormalities (Box 6.13). It must always rounding red flare on the trunk during the first week 
be interpreted in the context of the history of the (erythema toxicum or urticaria neonatorum) which 
pregnancy and birth and in the knowledge of any look alarming to the first-time parent but do not 
known history of inherited disorders in the family. have any pathological significance and usually fade 

Weight is measured routinely at birth; the head after a few days. Superficial peeling of the skin, 
circumference (occipitofrontal) may not be measured especially over the periphery, is common and is most 
before 48 hours, to allow for moulding to subside. apparent in post-term and some small-for-gestational-
Note whether meconium, the dark green, sticky stool age babies. Milia are whitish pinhead spots concen-
of the newborn baby, has been passed within the first trated mainly around the nose. They are sebaceous 
24 hours. If not, consider the possibility of retention cysts and can be felt with the finger. They 
Hirschsprung’s disease (agangliosis of the rectum). usually disappear within a month. Lanugo hair may 

It provides reassurance to the baby’s mother to cover the body, especially in preterm babies and some 
conduct the examination in front of her. Ask the dark-haired babies. It usually disappears over the first 
parent to undress the baby in a warm place and treat 2 or 3 weeks. Mongolian blue spot is the name given 
the baby gently, leaving the most unpleasant parts to the normal dark blue areas of pigmentation com-
of the examination until last. Initially watch the baby, monly seen over the sacrum and buttocks or back of 



SECTION Two
81

Children and adolescents ﻿
the legs in black and Asian babies, as well as some are seen: dermoid cysts and thyroglossal cysts in the 
from the Mediterranean region. midline or branchial cysts just in front of the upper 

third of the sternomastoid muscle.
The face
Look at the face for obvious dysmorphic features. The limbs
Accessory auricles are small, pedunculated skin tags, Examine the limbs for abnormalities. Extra digits on 
usually just in front of the ears. Note any lip defect the hand are not uncommon and may be familial 
which may indicate an underlying cleft palate. but are rarer on the feet. Look for a single transverse 

Once the superficial examination has been com- palmar crease, which is classically seen in babies with 
pleted, more formal examination takes place. As for trisomy 21, syndactyly (partial fusion of two or more 
older babies, this should be regional rather than by digits) and clinodactyly (in-turning of the tip of the 
systems, starting with the head and working down. digit). Talipes equinovarus is a serious abnormality 

of the arrangement of the tarsal bones and requires 
The head an orthopaedic referral.
Inspect and palpate the head. The caput succedaneum 
is an area of oedema of the scalp over the part of The chest
the head that presented during labour. It pits on The general appearance and shape of the chest should 
pressure and is not fluctuant. A cephalhaematoma is be noticed. Breast enlargement with exudation of a 
a subperiosteal haematoma which appears a few days milky fluid from the nipples is sometimes seen in 
after birth as a large, cystic swelling limited to the newborn infants of either sex. This is due to transferred 
area of one of the skull bones. It tends to resolve maternal hormones and disappears in a few days 
relatively slowly over a few months and may leave without causing problems. Listen for stridor which 
a calcified edge. It should be distinguished from a may be secondary to laryngomalacia or an anatomical 
meningocoele which is usually midline and occipital obstructive defect. Listen also for grunting. Note the 
and associated with an underlying bony defect. The symmetry of the chest wall, the pattern of respiration 
anterior fontanelle varies in size considerably at birth. and whether there is any in-drawing on inspiration. 

Neonatal breathing is predominantly abdominal and 
The eyes quiet. Palpation, percussion and auscultation are of 
The eyes are best examined when they are open almost no value in the neonate. Transient systolic 
spontaneously. A bluish tinge to the sclera is usual. murmurs are extremely common in the first few days 
Even though newborn infants can see, eye movements and may reflect the closing ductus arteriosus or non-
tend to be random, often giving the impression of a specific flow murmurs, as discussed earlier.
transient squint. Subconjunctival haemorrhages show 
as dark red patches covering the sclera, sometimes The abdomen
ringing the cornea, and can occur following normal The abdomen of a newborn baby usually seems a 
deliveries. Look for evidence of conjunctivitis which little distended and moves with respiration. Slight 
could be secondary to maternally transmitted infec- divarication of the rectus muscles may occur, and 
tions, and check for other abnormalities as described this exaggerates this abdominal bulging. True abdomi-
earlier in this chapter. In particular, check for the red nal wall defects may be present, such as exomphalos. 
reflex, as its absence could indicate a major ophthalmic The liver edge is palpable up to 2 cm below the 
problem, such as a retinoblastoma or cataract. costal margin, and the lower poles of both kidneys 

can be felt. A very enlarged bladder could suggest a 
The mouth and tongue neurological problem such as spina bifida. Check the 
Make sure that there is no cleft of the palate, and umbilical stump: it should contain two arteries and 
note particularly whether the uvula is normal. A bifid one vein. A single umbilical artery is associated with 
uvula indicates a submucous cleft of the palate, which an increased incidence of congenital abnormalities 
requires surgery. Epithelial pearls are small white of the renal tract. Sometimes excess granulation tissue 
areas, best seen on the hard palate. Occasionally teeth accumulates over the stump to form a small granu-
are present at birth. They are usually incisors, and loma; this can be treated by local application of a 
can be green in colour. If loose, they are best removed. silver nitrate stick.
True macroglossia is seen in babies with congenital 
hypothyroidism, Beckwith’s syndrome and in muco- The perineum and genitalia
polysaccharidosis. Children with trisomy 21 appear Examine the perineum for hypospadias, hydroceles, 
to have large tongues because their mouths are small, inguinal hernias or undescended testicles. Look for 
resulting in protrusion. patency of the anus: an imperforate anus is easily 

overlooked unless it is specifically checked for. While 
The neck looking at the buttocks and anus, inspect for a sacral 
The neck of a newborn baby seems rather short and dimple. This is a blind-ending pit which is usually of 
can be difficult to visualize. Rarely, cystic swellings no significance. Make sure that the back is straight 



82 6 Children and adolescents ﻿
and that there are no gross spinal lesions, especially Examination of the hips
spina bifida. Check female external genitalia for Examination of the hips is essential but should be 
clitoral enlargement, which would suggest a virilizing left to the end because it can be uncomfortable for 
condition such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and the baby. It is performed by carrying out two provoca-
for labial fusion. It is not unusual for girls to have a tion manoeuvres to demonstrate that the femoral 
mucus vaginal discharge and sometimes bleeding. head can be dislocated and then lifted back into the 
This is the result of transferred maternal hormones acetabulum, as illustrated in Figs 6.12 and 6.13. It is 
and is usually transient. Make sure that the femoral usual to differentiate between a tendinous ‘click’ and 
pulses are palpable. the typical ‘clunk’ of a hip moving in and out of its 
Neurological assessment socket. The latter is more a feeling than an actual 

noise. Asymmetry of skin creases on the upper 
Combine a formal neurological examination with posterior thigh and limitation of abduction are signs 
observation of the baby’s behaviour. Spontaneous which do not develop until 6 weeks of age. If there 
movement normally consists of alternating flexion is any doubt about possible congenital dislocation of 
and extension. Any marked difference between the the hip, ultrasound examination should be carried 
two sides is abnormal. out. This is routine for all at-risk newborn babies 

The normal position of a newborn baby is one of (breech delivery, a family history of congenital disloca-
flexion. If the baby is crying, look for any weakness tion of the hip (especially if female) and any baby 
or paralysis in the face, suggesting injury to the facial in an unusual intrauterine position).
nerve, or any deficiency of arm movements suggesting Having now completed the examination, the baby 
injury to the brachial plexus which may have occurred should be dressed and, as in every examination of 
during delivery (Erb’s palsy). Note the limb and 
truncal tone. Assess power from resistance during 
undressing. Tendon jerks are difficult to elicit at this 
age but can be checked, using a finger rather than a 
tendon hammer.

Primitive reflexes
Primitive responses are present in the normal newborn 
infant and disappear at variable times in accordance 
with developmental progress (see Box 6.8). The 
absence of one or more of these reflexes in the 
newborn infant may indicate some abnormality of 
the brain, a local abnormality in the affected limb 
or a neuromuscular abnormality. The most well- 
known startle reflex is the Moro reflex (Box 6.8 and 
Fig. 6.11). As it is a startle reflex and may make the 
baby cry, it should be left until the end of the examina- Figure 6.12  Stage 1 of the examination of the hips: the hips are 
tion. A clearly unilateral response suggests some local flexed, rotated medially and pushed posteriorly. This will dislocate 
abnormality, such as a fracture or brachial plexus dislocatable hips. 
injury in the arm on the side that does not respond. 
Persistence of primitive reflexes beyond the fourth 
month of life should alert you to the possibility of 
developmental delay.

Figure 6.13  Stage 2 of the examination of the hips: the hips are 
abducted and a ‘click’ or a ‘clunk’ is felt for (see text). Note the 
position of the examiner’s hands, with the thumbs on the medial 

Figure 6.11  Eliciting the Moro reflex. aspect of the thigh and the fingers over the lateral trochanters. 



SECTION Two
83

Children and adolescents ﻿
children, your findings must be conveyed to the child’s confidence. Students and doctors new to 
parents. working with children have a natural anxiety when 

approaching young children, and it is only by playing 
Summary and being with them that confidence in examining 

them will develop. Developing and practising the 
Throughout this chapter, emphasis has been placed skills of the examination of children is a challenge 
on getting to know the child and treating him as that is immensely rewarding when completed 
gently as possible. Time has to be spent gaining the satisfactorily.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Older people 7 
Adam Feather

Introduction 1	 Acceptance of ill health, with delay in seeking 
help.

‘In the end, it’s not the years in your life that 2	 Atypical presentation of disease processes.
The acceptance of ill health and disease as ‘ageing’, 

count. It’s the life in your years.’ with its resultant disabilities, means that many older 
Abraham Lincoln people expect to be frail, rarely complain and often 

At the turn of the twentieth century, there were seek help late. Coming to terms with some disability 
65 000 people in the UK aged 85 or older. By 2050, or change is necessary at all ages, and acceptance is 
it is projected there will be more than 3 million. Old part of survival. However, the tacit acceptance of 
age is still associated with frailty, disability inevitable deterioration – for example in vision, 
and loss of independence. The positive aspects of hearing, teeth and feet – may lead to treatable condi-
ageing, such as sagacity, maturity and experience, tions being ignored and result in loss of independence. 
are too often neglected. One hopes that these com- Table 7.1 illustrates what may be regarded as normal 
monly held negative beliefs about growing old ageing and what is pathological.
will gradually disappear as the period between the The range of presentation of disease in old age is 
average age of onset of disability in the old and the an essential element for the student and practitioner 
average age of death narrows and the elderly enjoy to comprehend. The term ‘geriatric giants’ (Box 7.1) 
healthier lives. refers to a set of symptoms and signs that occur in 

Age is traditionally defined in terms of chronological old age which may have as their cause many different 
age. Older people are considered in three distinct disease processes. In normal day-to-day circumstances, 
chronological groups: the young old (65-74), the old ageing organs are able to maintain normal metabolic 
(75-84) and the very old (85+). However, older people function. However, when major stressors are expe-
are a very heterogeneous group and each old person rienced, as in acute illness, functional capacity is 
should be respected as an individual, not merely exceeded and rapid clinical deterioration may occur. 
classed according to chronological age. Frailty, disability In the elderly patient, multiorgan failure may develop 
and dependency are not synonymous with getting rapidly in the context of illness, especially infections. 
old. The accumulation of disability resulting from Another important concept is that of multiple 
chronic disease and environmental insults must be comorbidities, which may be causally linked, although 
separated from the process of merely getting older, more typically they are not. Iatrogenic illness, most 
i.e. senescence. People age at different rates, and it is commonly due to polypharmacy, often exacerbates 
the interplay of environmental, genetic and acquired disability in the older person.
pathological processes that determines an individual’s Recognition of the social presentation of disease is 
biological age. Functional age takes into account the of major importance in older patients. The ‘social 
combination of a person’s biological and chronological admission’ to hospital and the subsequent failure to 
ages and, although difficult to define, this concept cope with this upheaval, often termed ‘acopia’ (a 
circumvents the negative implications of grouping made-up word), usually indicates a poor level of 
individuals together because of arbitrary socioeco- information gathering in the process of history taking, 
nomic or statutory definitions, such as ‘pensioner’. examination and investigation. The likelihood of the 
With an increasingly healthy and longer-lived popula- disease process leading to social decompensation, for 
tion, these concepts will require redefinition according example relatives leaving a person in the emergency 
to functional ability. department or the breakdown of the older person’s 

level of physical and mental function during hospi-
talization or illness at home, can usually be predicted 

Presentation of disease in older people and hence often prevented, thereby avoiding secondary 
disability.

Two major factors influence the recognition of disease Proper diagnosis and management in older people 
processes in older people: requires the identification and treatment of amenable 



86 7 Older people ﻿

Table 7.1  Normal ageing and changes in body systems
Pathophysiological changes common in 

System Normal ageing older age
Cardiovascular Slight increase in heart size Ischaemic heart disease

Normal stroke volume and left ventricular ejection Heart failure
fraction Valvular heart disease
Exertional oxygen consumption declines 7.5-10% per Peripheral vascular disease
decade; thus exercise tolerance is reduced Aneurysms

Respiratory Vital capacity: 40% reduction by age 70 Haemoptysis
FEV1 and FVC: 30% reduction by age 80 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Progressive reduction in PEFR after age 30 Lung fibrosis

Lung cancers
Alimentary Reduced and abnormal peristalsis: ‘presby-oesophagus’ Weight loss

Slower colonic transit Dysphagia
Reduced absorption of some nutrients; reduced energy Change in bowel habits
requirements Bleeding from the upper or lower GI tract

Hepatobiliary Reduced hepatic mass and metabolic reserve but Jaundice
maintenance of normal function Deranged liver function tests, including 

abnormal clotting
Renal Reduced GFR and numbers of functional tubules and Renal impairment with raised serum 

glomeruli creatinine
Reduced serum creatinine due to loss of muscle mass Haematuria

Genitourinary Men: Erectile dysfunction
Reduced testosterone Prostatic enlargement
Normal FSH/LH Bladder outflow tract symptoms
50% of men over 70 have ‘abundant spermatogenesis’ Postmenopausal bleeding (PMB)
Women: Urinary incontinence
Postmenopausal low oestradiol; raised Painful intercourse
FSH and LH
Loss of female reproductive capability
Atrophic vaginitis due to low oestrogen levels
Loss of sexual interest may also occur, but this is 
complex and multifactorial

Nervous system, High-frequency hearing loss Deafness, tinnitus and vertigo
including higher Vision: close focusing declines from age 40 Glaucoma, macular degeneration
senses Distinguishing fine detail (reduced acuity) declines Cataracts

after 70 years Dementia and delirium
Loss of muscle mass leads to decline in strength Hemiparesis, paraparesis
Reduced mental agility and minor loss of mental  Many other factors, including reduced distal 
ability sensation, vascular disease, poor balance

Endocrine Pituitary dysfunction Hyponatraemia
Abnormal thyroid function Hypothyroidism
Abnormal pancreatic function Impaired glucose tolerance and frank diabetes 
Reduced adrenal response to stress mellitus

Musculoskeletal Increased body fat and loss of muscle mass (although Osteoarthritis and vertebral spondylosis
this may be retarded with exercise) Osteoporosis

Dermatological Loss of collagen in the skin leads to thin, paparaceous Basal and squamous cell carcinoma
skin Solar keratoses
Ecchymoses and senile purpura Malignant melanoma

Haematological Loss of T-cell function with age may be associated with Anaemia
and immune late-onset autoimmune disease Myelodysplasia
system Possible link between changes in immune system and: Haematological malignancies

(a)	age-related cancers Chronic lymphatic lymphoma and myeloma
(b)	response to disease

FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FSH, follicle stimulating hormone; FVC, forced vital capacity; GI, gastrointestinal; GFR, glomerular filtration rate;  
LH, luteinizing hormone; PEFR, peak expiratory flow rate.



SECTION Two
87

Older people ﻿

Box 7.1  The ‘geriatric giants’: major clinical syndromes Box 7.2  History taking: points to note
that may result from any disease process

■	 The introduction – observation as they enter; greeting
■	 Immobility, instability/falls ■	 Cadence and interest
■	 Incontinence ■	 Position and comfort of patient
■	 Intellectual impairment/confusion ■	 Vision, hearing, cognition
■	 Pressure ulcers ■	 Environment
■	 Impaired senses: vision, hearing, speech and language ■	 Autonomy and respect

■	 Use of multiple sources of information
■	 Interview versus interrogation

clinical problems and recognition of the special needs 
and the specific clinical presentations of older people. 
Thus, social aspects of care may be as important 
as the disease process itself. Understanding this Box 7.3  Observations during the introduction
encourages a patient-centred multidisciplinary team ■	 Can the patient see and hear you?
approach. Caring for older people requires clinical ■	 Is behaviour normal?
acumen and much skill. Geriatricians not only rec- ■	 Is language normal?
ognize diseases and their presentations in older people ■	 Does the patient understand your role as a doctor?
but perhaps equally importantly act as their patients’ ■	 Is the patient at ease, or in pain?
advocate in all areas of healthcare. ■	 Is there evidence of support from family or friends?

History
impaired, try to sit in a well-lit area to aid lip reading. 

Taking a good history is always essential but requires Hearing impairment is such a common problem that 
particular sensitivity in the elderly. Respect for any setting where older people are seen regularly 
autonomy should always be afforded, just as for the should have a communication aid available. Talking 
young. ‘Don’t talk about patients, talk with them’, at the bedside in a busy environment is accepted 
especially when dealing with carers. Negotiate how practice, but be sure the patient is really at ease, 
much information the patient would like to share especially if any delicate or personal issues need to 
with carers when giving investigation results or trying be discussed. Drawing the bed curtains offers some 
to obtain corroborative information. Avoid being privacy and dignity to the patient but does not ensure 
judgemental and paternalistic. The grey-haired are privacy.
not necessarily disabled or confused! Even severely The cadence of the history may be slower than 
physically disabled people, no matter what their age, with younger people. Try to avoid interrupting the 
may have the brightest minds. patient. There may be multiple medical and social 

There are several universal practical points in the issues, and it is important to let patients tell the story 
way the history is approached which are particularly in their own way, as they will often prioritize issues. 
important when taking a history from an older patient Learning to interrupt politely and redirect the con-
(Box 7.2). The first contact is extremely important versation is a necessary but difficult skill to learn. 
(Box 7.3). Eye contact, a greeting, an outstretched Only when the patient has given consent should 
hand (expecting a returned handshake), your name you attempt to corroborate information with relatives 
and the purpose of the meeting are all that are or carers.
required to begin with. These relatively simple gestures 
can provide a wealth of information in the first few The social history and social networks
minutes. Depressed and very anxious patients may 
avoid eye contact. The handshake is often revealing. The social history has extra significance in older 
Some patients with dementia may not respond, not people. Routine questions regarding occupation, 
recognizing the meaning of the social gesture. Fright- smoking and alcohol are often forgotten but should 
ened older patients may continue to clutch one’s provide a familiar stepping-stone to discussing the 
hand. Giving your name and purpose puts people at patient’s home, how he is managing and what support 
ease and can also be used later to assess short-term he has. Find out the kind of home he lives in, the 
memory. Ask the person ‘What is your name?’ Be number of internal and external stairs, where the 
alert for hearing impairment. The reply will indicate toilet and bathroom are situated, and who does 
how a person wishes to be addressed; alternatively, the cooking, shopping and cleaning. Remember that 
the patient may be specifically asked this. most older people, including many of those with 

The environment should be changed to suit the severe functional impairment, live in private house-
individual patient, particularly if he is in a wheelchair, holds. Many are dependent to a greater or lesser 
has multiple carers or is deaf. Ensure the patient puts extent upon friends and relations who contribute to 
on any spectacles or hearing aid. If he is hearing their social networks, whether informally or formally. 



88 7 Older people ﻿

Box 7.4  Social networks Table 7.2  The Barthel ADL Index (total score 20)
Informal Item Categories
■	 Family, friends and neighbours: available, concerned Bowels 0 = incontinent (or needs to be given an 

and committed, familiar, flexible enema)
Formal 1 = occasional accident (once per week)
■	 Financial entitlements: pension and other income 2 = continent
■	 Statutory services: healthcare and social services Bladder 0 = incontinent/catheterized, unable to 
■	 Voluntary services: church and charity manage

1 = occasional accident (max once every 24 h)
2 = continent (for over 7 days)

No assessment of an older person with even a slight Grooming 0 = needs help with personal care
disability is complete without a description of the 1 = independent face/hair/teeth/shaving 
people who are available to help. The informal (implements provided)
network of support consists of both direct and Toilet 0 = dependent
extended family and friends and neighbours (Box use 1 = needs some help but can do something 
7.4). This network is usually limited in size but often alone
has a long history of contact. Although perhaps less 2 = independent (on and off, dressing, 
skilled than a formal network, it has the great advan- wiping)
tage of being flexible, familiar and continuous. The Feeding 0 = unable
formal network consists of any basic financial entitle- 1 = needs help cutting, spreading butter, etc.
ments, such as pensions, statutory agencies and in 2 = independent (food provided in reach)
the UK, the NHS, which includes a community Transfer 0 = unable – no sitting balance
multidisciplinary team, and the local social services, 1 = major help (one or two people, physical), 
e.g. home care, meals-on-wheels and day care facilities. can sit
Local availability of these organizations will vary. 2 = minor help (verbal or physical)
Finally, voluntary organizations, religious authorities 3 = independent
and other organizations can provide valuable help. Mobility 0 = immobile

1 = wheelchair independent (includes corners)
Activities of daily living 2 = walks with help of one (verbal/physical)
An enquiry about activities of daily living (ADL) 3 = independent (may use any aid, e.g. stick)
provides useful information in patients with multiple Dressing 0 = dependent
disabilities and health problems (see Table 7.2) and 1 = needs help, does about half unaided
informs the planning of treatment and future care. 2 = independent, includes buttons, zips, shoes
In general, patients who can dress, get about outdoors, Stairs 0 = unable
are continent, can do their own housework and 1 = needs help (verbal, physical), carrying aid
cooking and manage their own pension do not require 2 = independent
much immediate enquiry other than about their Bathing 0 = dependent
presenting problem. Among the old and the very old, 1 = independent (may use shower)
such patients are the exception. If a daily living task The Barthel Index should be used as a record of what a patient does, not as a 
cannot be carried out, a detailed enquiry focusing on record of what he was able to do previously. The main aim is to establish the 
the reason for this must be made. degree of independence from any help, physical or verbal, however minor and 

It is useful to obtain a ‘premorbid’ picture of the for whatever reason. The need for supervision means the patient is not 
independent. Performance over the preceding 24-48 hours is important, but 

patient’s ADLs. This provides a rough goal for the longer periods are relevant. A patient’s performance should be established 
outcome of treatment. A patient who previously had using the best available evidence. Ask the patient or carer, but also observe 
limited functional abilities and needed a lot of help what the patient can do. Direct testing is not needed. Unconscious patients 
to remain independent is unlikely to return to an score 0 throughout. Middle categories imply that the patient supplies over 50% 

independent lifestyle after a serious illness. One cannot effort. Use of aids to be independent is allowed.

assume that an older person was free from disability 
before the onset of an acute illness, and a corroborative Box 7.5  Areas to cover in a treatment history
history of premorbid ability is essential in planning ■	 Current medications
future needs. ■	 Previous hospital and family doctor medications

■	 Treatment from ‘alternative’ practitioners
Drug history ■	 Self-medication

■
Older people are prescribed more medication than 	 Past bad experiences with medicines

■
any other age group. A treatment history checklist is 	 Other non-drug treatments

■
useful when enquiring about current and past medica- 	 Medicines kept in the home

■
tions (Box 7.5). This is applicable to any patient with 	 Compliance and help: dosette box; nurses; carers



SECTION Two
89

Older people ﻿
chronic illness or multiple comorbidities. Many However, disability and cognitive impairment should 
patients do not take all (or even any) of their pre- not be used as an excuse for not performing a 
scribed medications. Checking dates on bottles, and complete assessment. Older people may present many 
a tablet count, is a rough guide to compliance. years after they last visited a doctor. The examination 
Medicine cabinets often contain old medications kept should therefore include screening tests such as body 
for use in the event of future problems – patients weight, urinalysis, breast examination and digital 
will sometimes change a new medication for an older, rectal examination, including assessment of the 
trusted remedy without telling the doctor. Compliance prostate. Remember, the patient has the right to 
may be improved by the use of dosette boxes or by refuse these seemingly irrelevant examinations, and 
carers giving the patient his medications. The local full explanations are needed.
pharmacist and GP will also be useful contacts when Where appropriate, ask the patient to undress 
checking adherence to a treatment regimen. himself. Consider whether he can reach his feet and 

manage buttons. Can he get on to the examination 
Review of systems couch unaided? If the patient does have obvious 

weakness or disability, help him to undress, making 
The systems enquiry used for younger patients may sure there are grab rails around the couch or bed, 
produce spurious symptoms, many of which are not the height of which should be adjustable, or there is 
immediately relevant. However, do not be too hasty a step provided for the patient to get on and off. 
to dismiss them. If they are a concern to the patient, Once the patient is undressed, make sure comfort 
they may be important to your diagnostic search. and dignity are preserved. If the patient is agitated 
The traditional review of systems may also be used or if you are intending an invasive examination, a 
as a ‘medical sieve’ when there are multiple, seemingly nurse must be present to assist.
unconnected symptoms. In patients with cognitive 
impairment or in the acutely unwell, it may be neces- Special considerations
sary to check key points in the history from collateral 
sources. Always obtain all the old case notes. After Skin
obtaining permission from the patient, if this is pos-
sible, talk to a close relative or friend. The telephone Wrinkles are mainly due to past exposure to ultraviolet 
can be a vital piece of equipment for history taking light and hence are not usually seen in covered areas. 
with disabled older patients. Ensure that any informa- The skin of the elderly bruises easily (senile purpura); 
tion you obtain is based on recent contact with the some people have skin like transparent tissue paper, 
patient and is not anecdotal and several years out of described as paparaceous, especially on the backs of 
date. Always try to check with the patient that the the hands and the forearms (Figs 7.1 and 7.2). The 
information is reliable. skin around the eyes may show yellow plaques – 

Dubreuilh’s elastoma. Some solar-induced changes 
to be aware of include keratoacanthoma, basal cell 
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and malignant 

Examination melanoma. The most common skin lesion noted is 
the small red Campbell de Morgan spot, a benign 

General lesion seen most often on the trunk and abdomen.
Leg ulcers resistant to healing are common in old 

Examination starts at the first contact and continues age: 50% are due to venous stasis (Fig. 7.3), 10% to 
throughout the consultation. Useful information may arterial disease and 30-40% are of mixed origin. 
be gathered at any point in your assessment, particu-
larly with regard to functional abilities and cognition. 
The examination of an older person should be 
thorough, appropriate and respectful but may be 
limited by the patient’s disability or cognitive impair-
ment or by lack of appropriate privacy. Be guided by 
the principle of ‘appropriateness and need’. For 
example, a frail, severely disabled or cognitively 
impaired patient will find it very difficult to cooperate 
with a formal neurological assessment and will tire 
rapidly. The examination thus becomes impossible, 
invalid and inappropriate. Likewise, a digital rectal 
examination may normally be considered part of a 
comprehensive examination but may simply be 
inappropriate or impossible in such patients. The 
answer to the question ‘How will this part of the 
examination contribute to the management of this 
patient?’ should then direct further assessment. Figure 7.1  Transparent ‘paparaceous’ skin and senile purpura. 



90 7 Older people ﻿
Check cutaneous pressure areas, especially the 

heels, hips and sacrum, for signs of skin breakdown 
(pressure or decubitus ulcers).

Cardiovascular system
Cardiovascular examination in older patients is no 
different from that in younger adults, but there are 
a number of important factors to take into account. 
Bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias are common 
in sick, older patients and may lead to cardiovascular 
collapse despite similar rates being well tolerated 
in the young. The increase in heart rate in response 
to stress (e.g. exercise, illness or pyrexia) is reduced 
in advanced old age, and this may be exacerbated 

Figure 7.2  Transparent ‘paparaceous’ skin. The surface has by medications such as β-blockers and other 
been broken by trivial trauma. antiarrhythmics.

A lying and standing (or sitting) blood pressure is 
extremely useful, but may not be obtainable in the 
more disabled patient. Postural hypotension, defined 
as a drop in systolic blood pressure of more than 
20 mmHg on standing, is a considerable cause of 
morbidity in old age, often caused or exacerbated by 
medications. The sitting or standing blood pressure 
should be measured immediately prior to and then 
1, 3 and 5 minutes after changing position. Age-related 
structural and functional changes in the cardiovascular 
system account for a slight increase in mean blood 
pressure with increasing age, although adult hyper-
tensive guidelines should still be applied.

Heart valves, especially the aortic valve, can become 
less mobile, exacerbated by calcification. This is known 
as aortic sclerosis and is characterized by a non-
radiating ejection systolic murmur, heard loudest in 
the aortic area. Degeneration and calcification of the 
mitral valve can result in either apical ejection 
murmurs or the more common pansystolic mitral 
regurgitant murmur (see Ch. 11).

Arterial abnormalities such as an aortic aneurysm, 
arterial bruits and evidence of peripheral vascular 
disease should be sought. Palpation of the pulses can 
be difficult because of atheroma or oedema and, in 

Figure 7.3  Leg ulcers. the lower limbs, Doppler measurement (see above) 
may be necessary to assess the peripheral circulation. 
Assessment of retinal vessels for signs of disease, as 

Examination should include sensory (neuropathic in hypertension and diabetes, can prove difficult in 
ulcers) and vascular (ischaemia and varicose veins) old people owing to the frequent presence of 
examinations of the lower limbs. Measure the ankle cataracts.
and brachial blood pressures using a Doppler meter 
and sphygmomanometer cuff, the Doppler meter Respiratory system
being used instead of a stethoscope at the feet. The 
ankle–brachial pressure index (ABPI) is calculated Kyphosis, resulting from intervertebral disc degenera-
using the formula: tion and osteoporosis, and calcification of the costal 

cartilages make the chest wall more rigid and less 
= Ankle systolic pressure

ABPI expansible. A reduction in pulmonary elasticity with 
Brachial systolic pressure age may be responsible for some hyperinflation on 

a chest radiograph, but this is principally due to 
An ABPI of 1.0 is normal; an ABPI below 1.0 may pathological hyperexpansion associated with chronic 

indicate arterial disease. An ABPI <0.8 indicates obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Generally, 
compromised distal circulation, and so pressure the physical signs of respiratory system disease are 
bandaging for leg ulceration should be avoided. the same in the old as in the younger patient. 



SECTION Two
91

Older people ﻿
Measurements of peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) Box 7.6  Faecal impaction may cause
and vital capacity (VC) are reduced (see Table 7.1) 
but, despite these changes, normal oxygenation is ■	 Faecal incontinence (ball-valve effect, with spurious 
maintained and the normal adult ranges for oxygen diarrhoea)
saturation should be used. ■	 Intestinal obstruction

‘All that crackles is not necessarily heart failure or ■	 Restlessness and agitation in the confused (but never 
pneumonia.’ Coarse basal crackles caused by air itself causes confusion)
trapping owing to loss of pulmonary elasticity can ■	 Retention of urine
make the interpretation of breath sounds difficult. It ■	 Rectal bleeding
is important to note their presence when the patient 
is well so that inappropriate therapy is not initiated 
if and when he becomes ill. In this situation, a chest 
radiograph is essential, regardless of the presence or 
absence of other signs and symptoms of cardiopul-
monary disease. Common changes on the chest 12
radiograph include calcification from old tuberculosis, 1
calcification in chondral cartilages and major blood 
vessels, pleural calcification from past pneumonia 2
and old rib fractures. Pleural effusions, cardiomegaly, 
areas of collapse and consolidation, interstitial changes 
and pleural thickening should not be accepted as 3
normal at any age. 4
Gastrointestinal system 5
The older patient should be weighed at every visit. 6

8 7
As in younger patients, nutritional assessment includes 
estimation of the body mass index (BMI): weight Figure 7.4  Clock-face drawing. 
(kg)/height (m2). Because of osteoporotic vertebral 
collapse and other age-related changes, height may 
reduce in the old and so trends in weight are a more 
useful benchmark. If a true nutritional assessment is Nervous system
required, skin folds at the biceps, triceps, waist and Central nervous system examination should routinely 
thigh should also be measured. include an assessment of higher cortical function 

The majority of older people are edentulous. If (language, perception and memory). If cognitive 
dentures are used, they should be worn during the impairment is suspected, assess the mental state early 
examination so that problems with fit, for example in the interview before the patient tires and record 
poor speech or eating difficulties, can be corrected the result in the clinical notes (see below). As well 
early. Oral candidiasis is common in the unwell older as the Abbreviated Mental Test Score (AMTS) and 
patient and is easily treatable. Leukoplakia appears Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) (see below), 
as small white patches on the oral mucosa. It is use the ‘clock test’. The patient is presented with a 
associated with repeated mucosal trauma and may drawn circle, about 10-15 cm in diameter, and asked 
become malignant. Varicosities on the underside of to fill in the numbers of a clock face (Fig. 7.4). 
the tongue are seen in about 40% of older people; Abnormalities may be due to visual impairment, 
their significance is unknown, but vitamin C deficiency agnosia (owing to right parietal lobe lesions) or 
has been implicated. cognitive impairment. This test is easily reproducible 

Abdominal examination may be limited by patients’ and less influenced by cultural and language problems 
orthopnoea, kyphoscoliosis or other disabilities. than the AMTS or MMSE. A newer test, the Test 
However, always try to perform an appropriate Your Memory (TYM), has recently been introduced 
assessment. If abdominal examination is limited by for patients attending diagnostic memory clinics or 
such disabilities, the patient will also find it difficult outpatient clinics to fill in prior to being seen by 
to lie supine for investigations such as computed medical staff.
tomography (CT) scanning or colonoscopy. The It is important to recognize difficulties with com-
indications for digital rectal examination are the same munication. Communication is a two-way process 
as for younger patients, but this may not be feasible that involves understanding and comprehension as 
or appropriate, particularly in the very disabled or well as the production of appropriate speech. Com-
frail older patient. Constipation severe enough to munication problems can be considered in terms of:
cause faecal impaction is not uncommon and can ■	 disorders of language (dysphasia)
have serious consequences (Box 7.6). This is often ■	 disorders of articulation (dyspraxia, dysarthria)
iatrogenic but if of recent onset should be investigated ■	 disorders of voice (dysphonia) or of fluency 
appropriately. (dysfluency).



92 7 Older people ﻿
Dysphasia, that is difficulty in encoding and decod- Box 7.7  The causes of falls in elderly people

ing language, is usually associated with a left hemi-
sphere lesion (see Ch. 16). Dyspraxia is difficulty Premonitory
initiating and carrying out voluntary movements, for ■	 Forerunner of acute, usually infectious, illness
example of the tongue, and hence can affect speech. Medication
Dysarthria has many causes, including local factors 

■
in the mouth and dentition, stroke, Parkinson’s disease 	 Multiple drug therapy

■
and other neurological disorders. Dysphonia, an 	 Psychotropic drugs

■
abnormality of the quality of the voice (e.g. hoarse- 	 L-dopa

■
ness), can be due to anxiety, vocal abuse, local disease 	 Antihypertensives

of the larynx and pharynx or hypothyroidism. It is Postural hypotension
common after throat surgery and intubation. Dysflu- ■	 Drugs
ency (stammer) is found in people of all ages. ■	 Alcohol

The formal assessment of the peripheral nervous ■	 Cardiac disease
system by examining muscle bulk, tone, power, ■	 Autonomic failure/dysfunction
sensation and tendon reflexes is something the Neurological disease
inexperienced clinician often finds difficult. In older, 

■
disabled patients, where judgements about normality 	 Neurocardiogenic syncope

■
and abnormality may be more subjective, this can 	 Multiple strokes

■
be especially difficult. As with all clinical skills, such 	 Transient ischaemic attack

■
judgement is acquired only with practice. As part 	 Parkinson’s disease

■
of this assessment, it is useful to ask the patient to 	 Cerebellar disease

■
hold his upper limbs fully extended and supinated, 	 Epilepsy

■
at shoulder height, with his eyes closed. Observe 	 Age-related loss of postural reflexes

■
for pronator drift, which is a sign of pyramidal 	 Spastic paraparesis (usually due to cervical spondylosis)

■
weakness. The reflexes should be examined in the 	 Peripheral sensory or motor neuropathy

■
normal manner. It is not uncommon for the ankle 	 Situational and postprandial syncope
jerks to be diminished or hard to elicit in very old Cardiovascular disease
people but, as with all clinical signs, this should be ■	 Carotid sinus syndrome
viewed in the context of other findings and not in ■	 Brady- and tachyarrhythmia: second-degree and 
isolation. complete heart block, sick sinus syndrome, atrial and 

It is essential to observe the walking or gait pattern ventricular tachyarrhythmias
wherever possible. This may reveal subtle evidence ■	 Structural abnormalities: valvular stenosis and 
of hemiparesis, poor balance (Box 7.7) or the regurgitation, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
furniture-clutching gait of the patient with long- ■	 Myocardial infarction and ischaemia
standing mobility problems. When observing the gait, Musculoskeletal disease
always have someone walk alongside the patient to 

■
offer a helping hand in case he stumbles or falls. 	 General muscle weakness (e.g. due to systemic 
Occasionally patients claim that they are capable of malignancy)

■
carrying out activities when in reality they cannot. 	 Muscular wasting due to arthritis

■
Always check the feet for chiropody problems 	 Unstable knee joints

■
(e.g. onychogryphosis), which cause a ‘painful’ or 	 Myopathy (e.g. osteomalacia)
antalgic gait. Miscellaneous

■	 Drop attacks
Vision and the eyes ■	 Hypoglycaemia
Age-related loss of periorbital fat may give the eyes ■	 Cervical spondylosis
a sunken appearance; this may be severe enough to ■	 Alcohol
cause drooping of the upper lid (ptosis) and redundant ■	 Elder abuse (e.g. physical mistreatment)
skin at the lateral borders. The loss of fat can also ■	 Poor vision
cause the lower eyelid to curl in (entropion) and ■	 Multisensory deprivation:
irritate the cornea, causing redness and watering –	 deafness
(epiphora) or to fall outwards slightly (ectropion). –	 poor vision
A whitish rim around the iris (arcus senilis) is a zone –	 labyrinthine disorder
of lipid deposition around the periphery of the cornea. –	 peripheral neuropathy

Visual acuity should be assessed and any loss of 
vision noted, together with the history of development 
of the visual disorder. Acute and chronic causes of 
loss of vision should be considered during the exami-
nation (Box 7.8). If the patient wears glasses, ask to 
see them. A state of disrepair may be an indication 



SECTION Two
93

Older people ﻿

Box 7.8  Common causes of acute and chronic loss  Box 7.9  Abnormalities of gait
of vision

■	 The broad-based, unsteady gait of cerebellar ataxia
Acute ■	 The high-stepping, foot-slapping unsteady gait of 
■	 Retinal detachment sensory ataxia
■	 Vascular (central retinal artery/vein thrombosis) ■	 The apraxic gait, with rapid small steps like a slipping 
■	 Angle-closure glaucoma clutch, or with feet apparently glued to the floor
Chronic ■	 The parkinsonian gait, with loss of postural reflexes, 

festination, a fixed posture, tremor, rigidity, hypokinesia 
■	 Cataract of face and limbs, excess salivation and seborrhoea
■	 Macular degeneration

■	 The gait of stroke with dragging of one leg
■	 Open-angle glaucoma

■	 The myopathic waddling gait due to weak proximal 
■	 Diabetic retinopathy muscles, e.g. from osteomalacia

■	 The tentative antalgic or painful gait of patients with 
acute pain from e.g. arthritis, injury or ulceration

of cognitive impairment and/or their underuse, thereby 
explaining falls and misinterpretation of the environ-
ment. The visual fields should always be assessed. It Immobility
is common to see irregular, asymmetrical pupils due 
to previous iridotomy. Pupillary responses are normal Impaired mobility is one of the most common clinical 
in the well, older patient, but stroke and medication presentations in the elderly. It is almost invariably 
may cause abnormal size and responses. Abnormalities multifactorial, and frequently the patient has several 
such as Horner’s syndrome and palsies of the third, other medical problems. A careful history is necessary 
fourth and sixth cranial nerves are relatively common to elucidate the likely underlying issues and in separat-
in the elderly, related to stroke and neoplastic disease. ing cause from effect. The essential information is 
Funduscopy should be attempted wherever necessary the onset of symptoms. Sudden immobility should 
but may be difficult when there are cataracts. be straightforward to diagnose, yet stroke and impacted 

subcapital femoral fractures are easily missed. A steady 
Hearing deterioration in mobility over several years implies 
Communication is often compromised in the older a chronic process, for example Parkinson’s disease or 
patient by hearing impairment. Patients are described osteoarthrosis. A stepwise decline indicates a disease 
as confused when in fact they are simply hearing that has periods of exacerbation and remission, for 
impaired. If deafness is detected, the external ear example recurrent strokes or rheumatoid arthritis. 
should be inspected for wax. This should be softened Rapid deterioration from full mobility to total 
with bicarbonate drops and then removed by gently immobility over a few days indicates a serious acute 
syringing the external auditory canal. Hearing loss is medical problem. The most difficult patients are 
often due to presbycusis an age-related degeneration those in whom the disease process caused immobility 
of the cochlear hair cells. If a hearing aid is being a long time ago and the clinical picture has become 
worn, make sure it is switched on. This is easily tested clouded by the complications of immobility.
by placing one’s hand over the aid. If it is on, it will Within the bounds of common sense, the patient 
let out a shrill whistle. Communication is aided by should be asked or helped to stand up and attempt 
raising your voice (but not by shouting), obtaining a few steps, during which the gait can also be assessed 
attention, sitting face to face, reducing background (see above). Always have someone in close attendance 
noise and speaking slowly and clearly. When the in case of falls. The patient may be able to mobilize 
patient has severe hearing impairment, you may need but unable to get out of a chair or bed unaided. Look 
to use written communication, provided his vision for signs of distress on standing that may not have 
is good enough. been mentioned by the patient. Tentative steps or 

clutching helpers may indicate loss of confidence or 

The ‘geriatric giants’ apraxia. Sometimes a diagnostic gait pattern is found 
(Box 7.9).

Professor Bernard Isaacs drew attention to the four 
‘geriatric giants’ (see Box 7.1) – immobility, instability Instability/falls
(falls), incontinence and intellectual impairment – in It is said that ‘young people trip, but old people fall’. 
the mid 1970s. Impaired senses (vision, hearing, With age, muscle strength is lost and postural reflexes 
speech and language), iatrogenesis and pressure ulcers become impaired. Falls are therefore common in old 
are now commonly included. These are important age, especially in the very old. Several causes may 
causes of disability and illness but are not diagnoses coexist (see Box 7.7). Even a single fall should lead 
in themselves so much as presentations of disease. to a detailed history and examination, and a corrobora-
In any older person presenting with one of the geriatric tive history sought from spouse or friends. In a patient 
giants, the underlying causes must be considered. who was previously well, a search should be made 



94 7 Older people ﻿
for new acute illness. If none is present, the fall may Box 7.10  Common causes of urinary incontinence in  
be deemed ‘accidental’ due to environmental or the older person
mechanical factors, although this is a diagnosis of 
exclusion. Information about the pattern of any ■	 Pelvic floor weakness
previous falls can be helpful: frequency, relationship ■	 Sphincter defects from injury in childbirth
to posture, activity or time of day, prewarning and ■	 Pelvic floor neuropathy
residual symptoms following the fall, and any avoiding ■	 Urinary tract infections
steps taken by the patient should be ascertained. The ■	 Bedridden state with immobility
absence of any warning implies a sudden event, usually ■	 Dementia and delirium
neurological or cardiovascular in nature. Sinister ■	 Neurological disease, e.g. stroke, myelopathy
symptoms associated with falling include loss of ■	 Autonomic neuropathy
consciousness (although, notoriously, this is poorly 
reported), focal neurological deficit, features of seizure, 
chest pain, palpitations or other cardiorespiratory 
symptoms. The most useful clinical investigation in 
older fallers is to watch them walking. Patients may 
also require 24-hour ambulatory electrocardiograph 
monitoring, a CT head scan and sometimes tilt-table 
testing.

Incontinence
Incontinence is an involuntary and inappropriate 
voiding or leakage of urine or faeces. Continence 
depends on intact sphincter mechanisms and the 
functional ability to toilet oneself or at least to 
acknowledge the need for toileting. Age-associated 
changes in the lower urinary tract predispose older 
people to incontinence but, despite these changes, 
most well older people are continent. Incontinence Figure 7.5  Superficial pressure ulcers. 
should not be regarded as a normal part of ageing 
and is more specifically associated with sphincteric 
damage, loss of neurological control mechanisms, Pressure ulcers
especially in dementia or stroke, and with severe The mean capillary pressure in the skin of healthy 
disability, chronic illness and frailty. Among the young adults is approximately 25 mmHg. A bedridden 
institutionalized older population, as many as 50% patient or a person lying on the floor generates pres-
may suffer urinary and/or faecal incontinence. sures in the skin in excess of 100 mmHg, especially 

When taking a history of urinary of faecal incon- over the sacrum, heels and greater trochanters (96% 
tinence, try to differentiate between loss of ability of ‘decubitus’ pressure ulcers occur below the level 
to control voiding and failure to identify or reach an of the waist). Such pressures lead to occlusion of 
acceptable place. Find out how socially disabling the cutaneous blood vessels, causing the surrounding 
incontinence has become: many patients become tissues, including the skin, to become hypoxic. In 
isolated or afraid to go out because of the associated such circumstances, necrosis of the skin, adipose tissue 
anxiety and potential embarrassment. Clinical exami- and muscle may develop in as little as 4 hours. About 
nation should include rectal and vaginal examinations, 80% of pressure ulcers are superficial (Fig. 7.5). They 
assessment of the prostate gland, evaluation of the occur mainly in dehydrated, immobile and incontinent 
pelvic floor muscles and culture of a mid-stream patients exposed to sustained pressure. People with 
specimen of urine. An incontinence chart kept for a impaired sensation or with diabetes are especially 
few days may suggest a recognizable pattern of urinary vulnerable. Decubitus ulcers are always potentially 
and/or faecal incontinence. The specialist help of a preventable but will occur in any setting if skin care 
continence adviser is often useful. Causes of urinary is disregarded. Any superficial ulcer will deepen if 
incontinence are shown in Box 7.10. the pressure is not relieved. Deep ulcers (Fig. 7.6) 

Faecal incontinence is relatively rare in well older are formed when localized high pressure applied to 
men but is principally associated with severe chronic the skin cuts off a wedge-shaped area of tissue, usually 
disability or cognitive impairment. In women, it is adjacent to a bony prominence.
relatively more frequent but still rare. It may result All at-risk patients should have active skin care 
from pelvic floor weakness. In both sexes, it may management, including good nursing care and adequate 
occur with carcinoma of the rectum, diverticular hydration, started immediately when a new illness 
disease, laxative abuse and excess, faecal overloading or injury occurs, whether at home or in hospital. All 
with impaction and neurogenic bowel. pressure area sites must be inspected at the first 



SECTION Two
95

Older people ﻿

Box 7.11  Abbreviated Mental Test (AMT): total score 10  
(1 point for each item)

A score of 7 or less implies significant cognitive impairment 
and should be followed up, if persistent, with an MMSE* 
and further investigation
■	 Age
■	 Time (to nearest hour)
■	 Address for recall
■	 Year
■	 Where do you live (town or road)?
■	 Recognition of two people
■	 Date of birth (day and month)
■	 Year of start of First or Second World War

Figure 7.6  Deep pressure ulcers. ■	 Name of present monarch/prime minister
■	 Count backwards from 20 to 1
*MMSE was copyrighted by its author’s university and has hence fallen out 
of day to day use. Commonly used in its place is the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MOCA) and other cognitive assessment scores.

even of long-lasting confusion – for example drugs, 
depression and endocrine abnormalities – and appro-
priate diagnosis and treatment may produce improve-
ment. Dementia is increasingly common in old age 
(10% above age 65 years, 20% above age 80 years) 
but is not a component of normal ageing. Regardless 
of age, a search for the cause is warranted. The 
differential diagnoses include benign senescent for-
getfulness, amnestic syndromes and depression 

Figure 7.7  An alternating-pressure air mattress (APAM). (pseudodementia).

The confused older patient
clinical assessment and again at regular intervals ‘Patient confused, no history available’ is a phrase 
during the illness. An alternating-pressure air mattress that should never be used. It is crucial to establish 
(APAM) in which horizontal air cells (Fig. 7.7) inflate whether the patient is oriented in place, time and 
and deflate over a short cycle, constantly supporting person, and whether he is alert. A corroborative 
the patient, provides periods of low pressure at all history from a friend or relative and thorough clinical 
pressure sites, and good protection. examination will help decide whether the confusional 

state is acute or chronic. It is important to use a 
Confusion standard test of mental function (Box 7.11). Explain 

to the patient that you wish to test his memory. With 
Delirium is an acute confusional state that occurs in experience, it is possible to check most of the items 
the context of a depressed level of consciousness. in the mental test score by working them into your 
Delirium may occur in patients with underlying brain introductory conversation. Hearing and speech impair-
disease, such as dementia, often termed ‘acute on ments (such as nominal dysphasia) can make people 
chronic confusion’ but more often occurs acutely in appear very cognitively impaired but should be easy 
the previously unimpaired. Often there are several to recognize. Depressed patients tend to perform 
underlying causes, including pneumonia, toxic states poorly on mental test scores. If a problem is detected 
and metabolic abnormalities, for example uncontrolled with a simple test, proceed to a more in-depth assess-
diabetes or hyponatraemia. Failure to recognize ment using the MMSE. Assessment of mental state 
delirium and therefore to diagnose and treat the is most valuable when applied serially over a period 
underlying condition can have fatal consequences. of time.
During any hospitalization, a person’s level of cognitive Management of suspected dementia should aim to 
functioning should be monitored periodically. confirm the diagnosis, to identify potentially reversible 

Dementia is a chronic confusional state associated causes and to determine a management plan with 
with loss of higher mental function, for example the patient and carers. This is best achieved in a 
judgemental capacity, memory and language, but diagnostic memory clinic, where a multidisciplinary 
unlike delirium it is not associated with altered approach involving a geriatrician, psychiatrist, psy-
consciousness. There are, however, reversible causes chologist and nurse specialist may be taken. As with 



96 7 Older people ﻿
any other group of patients, examination and investiga- ■	 Capacity is decision-specific; a patient may 
tion should be appropriate and directed towards retain capacity around one decision and not 
helping with the management plan. around another; for example, they may retain 

capacity around the dangers of going home but 
Assessment of capacity not around receiving a therapeutic intervention 

such as major surgery.
This is an important part of medical practice in general ■	 Do not assume that patients with a reduced 
but particularly important in the field of elderly care score on the AMTS (especially around scores of 
medicine. Although similar principles apply in most 6-8/10) do not retain capacity.
countries, the following text refers specifically to the When discussing ‘acting in a person’s best interest’ 
UK. Legally, competent adults (relatives or carers) (as a health or social care professional), the Act also 
are not able to make any decisions about the medical encourages a dialogue with any parties who may be 
management or social care of another adult unless involved with the person’s care or wellbeing. This is 
they have been made their legal representative through extremely important when negotiating with relatives 
a lasting power of attorney (LPA) or are a court-of- and carers about medical and social care. In the 
protection appointed deputy. Similarly, cognitively Emergency Department you should ensure that several 
impaired patients may be unable to make a valid and senior, experienced medical, nursing or therapy staff 
consistent decision. Such patients require assessment are involved in any decisions around a patient’s mental 
of their mental capacity when making important capacity; such decisions should not be made in 
decisions about their health or social care. A person isolation.
lacks capacity if he is deemed to have a temporary 
or permanent impairment of, or a disturbance in the 
functioning of, his mind or brain. The Mental Capacity 
Act (MCA; 2005) (see the Department of Health Other issues
Web site for more information: http://www.dh.gov. 
uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Bulletins/theweek/ Ethnic elders
Chiefexecutivebulletin/DH_4108436) defines a person Ethnic minority elders form a small but significant 
as lacking capacity (i.e. someone who is unable to proportion of the older population in many contem-
make a valid decision) if he is unable to: porary societies. Older ethnic populations may have 
■	 understand the information relevant to the a racial predisposition to certain conditions but often 

decision develop diseases similar to those of the indigenous 
■	 retain that information population within one to two generations. Indeed, 
■	 use or weigh that information as part of the environmental excesses, such as the Western diet, 

process of making the decision, or alcohol and cigarettes, may contribute to an increased 
■	 communicate their decision (whether by talking, incidence of premature death compared to their own 

sign language or any other means). indigenous population. The availability of health 
If one or more of the four criteria are not present, services for this group is often inadequate and insensi-

then the patient is deemed to lack capacity. Such tive to their specific needs. Any healthcare professional 
patients require an advocate from family or friends must always try to understand and respect the cultural 
(or an Independent Mental Capacity Advocate background of the patient and his family. Find out 
(IMCA) may be appointed). An IMCA advocates for about the beliefs and cultural background of your 
the patient and supports the decision-making process, patients – you will find it interesting as well as helpful 
trying to ensure the patient’s ‘likely’ wishes, feelings, in your work.
beliefs and values are taken into account. However, 
IMCAs cannot consent for or deny access to treatment Inadequate care and elder abuse
unless they have previous LPA (they must have 
evidence of this; verbal confirmation is not good There are many types of abuse and any older person 
enough) or the patient has a court-of-protection order can be a victim. About 5% of older people suffer 
in place. abuse. The most vulnerable are female partners, those 

When considering whether a patient retains mental living with adult children, perhaps because of financial 
capacity, one should also bear in mind the following: difficulties or unemployment, and older people in 
■	 Is the patient consistent in his decision? – Often poorly run institutional care homes. In the domestic 

demented patients make different decisions setting, abusers are often dependent on their victims 
each time they are asked a given question. for finance. They may themselves have health and 
Consistency is NOT part of the MCA definition financial problems, especially alcohol and psychological 
but pragmatically becomes important if they difficulties, and frequently their relationship has been 
keep changing their mind. dysfunctional for a long time. In institutions, inadequate 

■	 Does the patient personalize the information to staffing levels, poor staff training, repeated complaints, 
himself? This is not part of the MCA definition and poor client and environmental hygiene are all 
but important. indicators of potential abuse.



SECTION Two
97

Older people ﻿
Potential elder abuse should be considered if carers full social background is important, including a 

make frequent visits to doctors, are preoccupied with sympathetic description of the carer’s role. A thorough 
their own problems and often seem to indicate their physical examination should be made and the patient’s 
inability to cope, perhaps using non-verbal cues. mental state assessed and recorded. If abuse is sus-
Marked changes in a carer’s lifestyle (bereavement, pected, expert help from senior colleagues, social 
unemployment, illness) may also precipitate abuse. services, psychiatrists or clinical psychologists may 
Recognition of elder abuse is made more difficult by be necessary for recognition, disclosure and manage-
the physiological and the pathological changes that ment. It may be necessary to involve the police. Elder 
occur with ageing (e.g. senile purpura). However, abuse is a complex phenomenon which is only 
abrasions, pressure ulcers and poor nutrition should beginning to be recognized. We fail the most vulner-
raise the possibility of abuse. Assessment requires a able people in our society, however, if we are not 
history that includes open questions about the pos- sufficiently aware of the problem.
sibility of violent behaviour. Enquiry regarding the 



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Psychiatric assessment 8 
Trevor Turner

Introduction work (literally, solving problems) during which items 
of evidence for the diagnosis are unearthed. Sometimes 

Psychiatry is the medical specialty that concerns itself the evidence will be in the form of the patient’s 
with the diagnosis and management of mental illness. narrative (i.e. a particular constellation of symptoms) 
Many people, even fellow doctors, often feel confused or particular themes in their thinking. Sometimes it 
about the distinction between psychiatry and other is the way the patient talks – for example, a patient’s 
disciplines in which the prefix ‘psych’ appears, for speech can reveal thought disorder of the mind (a 
example psychology and psychotherapy. The distinc- symptom of schizophrenia) – whereas at other times 
tion is quite clear though, since psychiatry is practised it may be the patient’s own experience – for example 
by medically qualified practitioners who deal with third-person auditory hallucinations (see below). 
diseases of the mind (i.e. psychiatrists are doctors), These are a hallmark of schizophrenia, whereas visual 
just as gastroenterology is concerned with diseases hallucinations are strongly suggestive of an organic 
of the gut and cardiology with diseases of the heart. brain disorder.
The proper practice of psychiatry involves an under- Psychiatric diagnoses are syndromal diagnoses 
standing of the normal workings of the mind and (i.e. they are based on clusters of symptoms and 
brain and a thorough knowledge of psychopathological overlap to a degree). There are very few clinical 
manifestations of the mind and the behaviours that signs in psychiatry (for example, abnormal postures 
accrue when mental illness is present. It embraces or overt thought block when the patient suddenly 
therefore not only full medical training (and post- stops talking). There are also no confirmatory inves-
graduate clinical practice) but also a knowledge of tigations such as blood tests or X-rays, but such 
psychology and personality structure and a wider investigations may be crucial to excluding organic 
understanding of sociology, culture and belief systems. conditions (e.g. hypothyroidism, brain tumour). If, 

As in any medical specialty, the cornerstone of after taking a history and performing an MSE the 
becoming a successful practitioner is clinical experi- clinician suspects the patient has schizophrenia, it 
ence and the mastery of taking a detailed history and cannot be confirmed with a definitive blood test or 
performing an examination of the mind, referred piece of imaging. The diagnosis rests solely on eliciting 
to as a mental state examination (MSE). It is also the typical cluster of symptoms of schizophrenia, 
often essential to perform a general physical examina- and observing the abnormalities of behaviour (not 
tion. History taking follows a similar structure to necessarily present), speech, thought and experi-
that adopted in any branch of medicine, with some ence which are typically seen in the schizophrenia 
additions and adaptations. The MSE is unique to syndromes.
psychiatry and involves learning a systematic way of It is therefore clear that in psychiatry, the impor-
observing and recording all aspects of how the patient tance of meticulous history taking (and in particular 
behaves and appears in the consultation, what he obtaining a collateral history, since patients may not 
says and how he says it. be able to give a clear account of themselves) as well 

Thus the clinical symptoms, signs and presentations as a detailed MSE is paramount. There is nothing 
of abnormal experience (often referred to as phe- else upon which to base a diagnosis, and diagnosis is 
nomena) are recorded in a systematic way, and this the basis of appropriate treatment. It is also vital that 
is the basis of the diagnosis. It is, therefore, crucial the history and symptoms are accurately recorded, 
to understand how to perform the MSE properly because the illness may have evolved in a patient 
and how to be rigorous and systematic in recording who has been ill for some while. It can be vital to 
both normal (‘no abnormality detected’ – NAD) and the diagnosis to know how the illness has evolved, 
abnormal phenomena, which point to a particular the effects of treatment, and, for example, changes 
diagnosis. Gaining experience in this technique is in insight (see below). Despite the lack of so-called 
vital to psychiatric expertise. ‘objective’ testing, trained psychiatrists are extremely 

The process of history taking and examination reliable in their diagnoses (greater reliability for 
should be seen as an exploration akin to detective example than diagnoses of an acute abdomen), but 



100 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿
it is a speciality that requires accumulated clinical Safety
experience as well as background knowledge. The doctor should sit nearest the door and neither 

The main purpose of this chapter is to teach the the patient nor any obstacles should block the doctor’s 
skill of taking a psychiatric history and performing ability to exit. There should be an alarm buzzer and 
an MSE in the context of the typical diagnostic someone available to respond to the alarm. In the 
presentations (e.g. depression, anxiety, schizophrenia) emergency department where patients have been 
that are encountered. brought to hospital in a disturbed state, other safety 

measures may also be needed, for example checking 
for weapons and having a security presence or a 

History taking chaperone.

As in all of medicine, the history if properly elicited Privacy
should provide the basis for a diagnosis, which the The patient should be interviewed in a quiet private 
clinical examination (including the MSE) is used to space where he is not likely to be overheard by other 
confirm and/or clarify. Furthermore, in psychiatry the patients and staff. Clearly there is a balance to be 
history taking and MSE should begin the development struck, and the need for police or security presence 
of a therapeutic rapport with the patient upon which nearby may sometimes outweigh the privacy and 
effective management rests. Possibly more than in confidentiality requirement. However, such situations 
any other specialty, there are steps to be taken even are exceptional since most psychiatric consultations 
before starting to talk to a patient. The first step is can be conducted privately and confidentially, 
to consider the context of the interview (emergency, although many people like to have a family member 
routine, legal) and where it will take place. The second or friend with them as support, and this should be 
is to think about what background information is encouraged.
accessible and necessary, since a good referral letter 
from a GP can so outline the history that going onto Collateral history
the specialist part of psychiatric examination (the 
MSE, for example) can be expedited. Psychiatry is unique in requiring more than the 

patient’s account of problems. Previous medical or 
Context of the interview GP notes or information on the mental health record 

system provide valuable information. For example, 
There are important factors which will tend to be in a patient with unexplained physical symptoms, a 
different in different settings, for example, outpatients, history of previous presentations with unexplained 
the emergency department, the medical or psychiatric symptoms can point to a particular diagnosis (e.g. a 
ward, the home or even the street. somatoform disorder, in which patients experience 

a range of physical symptoms which have no physical 
Patient factors basis but which cause them distress and anxiety).
Is the patient aware of the referral? Is he expecting It is also important to check for a history of previous 
to see a psychiatrist? What does he think of seeing violent behaviour, as the best predictor of future 
a psychiatrist? The assessment may be of a patient violence is previous violence. It is vital that any violent 
following an overdose or who has been brought in behaviour (to self, others or the environment) is 
by the police under the Mental Health Act section, recorded accurately in the notes and electronic 
who may have no wish to engage in any kind of recording systems.
psychiatric assessment. A patient may have presented As noted above, the other valuable source of 
with what has been assumed to be a medical problem, information is talking to informants who know the 
and all too often a psychiatric referral may not even patient well, for example partners or friends. This 
have been discussed with the patient beforehand. requires the patient’s permission, and if the partner 
Clearly the approach to the interview in these situ- or friend is not accompanying him, then it may need 
ations will be very different compared to that of a to take place after the interview. In the inpatient 
patient voluntarily attending a psychiatric outpatient setting it is appropriate to talk to other health profes-
clinic, having sought specific help. It will require a sionals (e.g. nurses, social workers) who have been 
careful and skilful engagement of the patient in the working with the patient.
assessment. How successful this will be will determine 
the extent of the history taking that is possible.

Factors in the physical environment The psychiatric history
Psychiatric assessment requires a suitable interview Introduction
room, in terms of safety, privacy, and confidentiality. 
Quiet surroundings, in which a patient can be listened Introduce yourself, shake hands (if appropriate) and 
to and engaged with, are essential although not always tell the patient clearly who you are, who has referred 
possible. the patient to you, the purpose of the interview and 



SECTION Two
101

Psychiatric assessment ﻿
how long it is likely to take. Obviously physical is to use a normalising statement. This is employed 
contact should be avoided with a patient who seems when you are asking about symptoms or behaviours 
very fearful or likely to strike out. Sensitivity to a that the patient may find embarrassing or difficult 
patient’s body language helps to judge the most to acknowledge. For example, you might say something 
appropriate way in which to greet him. It is worth like ‘Sometimes when people have been feeling very 
asking if he was even expecting to be seen and how depressed or have been under great stress, they may 
he feels about this, reassuring him that you are a have odd experiences which they cannot explain. For 
doctor, for example just like his GP. example, they may hear or see things which are 

unusual – has anything like this happened to you?’ 
Confidentiality and note keeping Further examples of these are provided in the 

appropriate sections. Finish with a summary of 
Always inform patients that the conversation is what you have understood and check with the 
confidential, but that information will be shared with patient if you have missed anything that he feels is 
other healthcare professionals as appropriate, for important.
example a letter to the referring GP or to the physician 
or surgeon who has made a referral.

Where patients object to information sharing, be Structure of the psychiatric history
clear that some note keeping and communication is This section details all the areas of history taking 
essential, but details of very sensitive issues can be which need to be covered in a full psychiatric history. 
avoided in letters. However, patients have to know There may be situations where, in the initial assess-
that information cannot be withheld from others if ment, they cannot all be covered, usually because 
it is likely to place them or others at risk. the patient is too disturbed to engage with the 

Notes taken (whether written or typed) can be interview process or too disorganised in his thoughts 
brief but should be an outline of the key features, to produce comprehensible information. In these 
while not intrusive to the flow of the interview. situations, the omitted information can be gathered 
It is important to write some of the patient’s state- when the patient is somewhat better. Sometimes 
ments verbatim to illustrate his state of mind, and patients do not (understandably) feel comfortable 
this can provide evidence of the presence of certain sharing all aspects of their personal background at a 
symptoms with respect to the MSE and what aspects first meeting with a stranger. The interviewer needs 
to focus on. to be sensitive to this and to check with the patient 

as to how he feels and whether he is comfortable 
Interviewing a patient who does not  discussing a particular topic.

speak English Order of sections
Patients should always be offered an interpreter as 
they may feel more able and willing to discuss feelings The order in which the sections of the history are 
in their own language. Try not to use family members covered is suggested in Box 8.1 and followed in the 
as interpreters (except in emergencies where no text. However, if it is impossible to complete the 
alternative is available) as it raises confidentiality interview on a single occasion, it is more useful to 
issues. Conducting an interview via an interpreter have found out about previous psychiatric illness, 
requires more time, and there are pitfalls. Sometimes current contact with mental health services, medica-
patients may feel suspicious of someone from their tion and important medical conditions than it is to 
own community and may fear that the information know the patient’s father’s occupation or career 
will not remain confidential. Some interpreters impose details.
their own views and advice, and the interviewer It can be useful to present the information obtained 
should be alert for this. It is important to make clear as a life chart which illustrates, in adjacent columns, 
that you, the clinician, need to hear just what the years, patient’s age, social history, family history, 
patient has been saying, not any elaboration or inap- relationship/psychosexual history, medical history 
propriate summary. and psychiatric history as a way of illustrating possible 

predisposing factors, precipitating factors and main-

Interviewing technique taining factors in a patient’s illness.

As with any patient, aim for an open, empathic and Presenting complaint
non-judgemental approach and try to maintain non- Start by establishing the main problem for which 
threatening eye contact (for example, looking at the the patient is seeking help. In psychiatry, there will 
lower half of the face) as much as possible. Start with be situations in which the patient does not have any 
open questions, avoid loaded questions, encourage complaints and denies any problems (‘you tell me 
patients to tell their story in their own words and Doc!’). In this situation, the details of the presentation 
follow the approaches for general history taking and behaviour, as reported by others, as well as the 
detailed in Chapter 1. Another way of questioning concerns of others (especially the family) should be 



102 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.1  Suggested order for psychiatric history Box 8.2  Features supporting a diagnosis of depression
■	 Presenting complaint (C/O) ■	 Persistent/pervasive low mood, often tearfulness
■	 History of presenting complaint (HPC) ■	 Diurnal variation of mood, typically worse in the morning
■	 Previous medical history – psychiatric and physical ■	 Loss of motivation/interest

(PMH) ■	 Anhedonia, i.e. inability to experience pleasure in things
■	 Current medication/treatment ■	 Irritability and/or poor concentration
■	 Family history ■	 Lethargy, fatigue and lack of energy
■	 Personal history ■	 Sleep disturbance, usually early-morning waking

–	 Childhood ■	 Appetite and weight loss (increased in atypical 
–	 Schooling depression)
–	 Occupation ■	 Constipation and/or loss of libido
–	 Psychosexual history including relationships and ■	 Ideas of hopelessness, worthlessness, guilt, persecution, 

marriage nihilism
–	 Reproductive history (in women) ■	 Loss of confidence and social withdrawal
–	 Children ■	 More severe depression
–	 Present social circumstances ■	 Self-deprecation and/or self-neglect
–	 Social support ■	 Motor retardation, leading to depressive stupor
–	 Forensic history (if relevant) ■	 Retardation of speech, or muteness

■	 Premorbid personality ■	 Paradoxical agitation
■	 Psychotic symptoms with mood
■	 Congruent delusions and auditory hallucinations

recorded as the basis for your interview. If the patient 
is being formally held on any section of the Mental 
Health Act, this must be recorded. If the patient 
cannot define a problem, then telling him what others up in the morning or to focus on problems, but if 
have reported and why they are concerned can open none are volunteered a systematic inquiry is essential. 
up the conversation and allow him a chance to give Thus, in a patient presenting with depression, inquire 
his version of events. about other symptoms in the depressive syndrome 

(Box 8.2) such as concentration, memory, things not 
History of presenting complaint (HPC) enjoyed (anhedonia) and social withdrawal. Taking 
Obtain a detailed description of how symptoms began patients through a typical 24-hour day in terms of 
(e.g., ‘when did you last feel well?’), inquiring about sleep, waking, what they do and how they feel can 
the relationship to any life events that might have be very helpful. Anxiety and depression frequently 
kicked things off. Establishing if the symptoms are coexist and so either presentation should lead to a 
new, that there has been a change in their condition systematic inquiry about symptoms of the other. 
or they are longer lasting helps to clarify if the current Somatic and psychic symptoms of anxiety are outlined 
presentation is part of, for example, long-standing in Boxes 8.3 and 8.4. An acute onset of these will 
personality traits or due to the acute onset of a generate what is known as a panic attack.
psychiatric disorder. The nature and persistence of Biological symptoms are important in all mental 
symptoms and their impact on day-to-day functioning disorders, so inquiry should always be made about 
should be clarified. In order to fulfill diagnostic criteria sleep, appetite, weight and energy levels. Particular 
for a psychiatric disorder, symptoms should persist note should be taken of any abrupt change to sleep 
across different circumstances and be severe enough pattern, as this is more significant in diagnosis than 
to have an impact on a patient’s functioning in a chronic sleep problem. Inquire about sleep onset. 
daily life. Delay in getting to sleep is described as initial 

For example, with low mood it is important to insomnia, and initial insomnia of 1 or 2 hours or 
establish whether the low mood is a brief fluctuation more is pathological. It is often due to intrusive 
or whether it has persisted for a period of time. (The anxiety, perceptual experiences such as voices (see 
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and below) or pain. Inquire about waking in the night, 
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision – ICD-10 since this is a pattern sometimes seen in anxiety. 
specifies 2 weeks of low mood for a formal diagnosis Waking regularly in the early hours (e.g. 3 or 4 in 
of depression.) How reactive is it to circumstances? the morning) and being unable to get back to sleep 
Moods unreactive to day-to-day events are generally is a pattern described as ‘early morning wakening’ 
indicative of a greater severity of depression. The and is indicative of a depressive disorder. Sometimes 
evolution of symptoms over time, any help sought patients have a shifted sleep phase (sleep lag syndrome, 
or given and any treatment received should all be just like jet lag) so, although they do not get off to 
clearly noted. sleep until late into the night and will complain about 

Patients may volunteer symptoms associated with this, they will sleep on until later in the morning, say 
the presentation, for example, finding it hard to get midday.



SECTION Two
103

Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.3  Somatic symptoms of anxiety important to inquire into changes in weight in relation 
to starting psychotropic medication. Many psycho-

■	 Headaches and other muscular aches and pains tropic medications (e.g. some antidepressants, 
■	 Palpitations antipsychotics and anticonvulsants) tend to cause 
■	 Breathlessness (typically feel unable to get breath in) weight gain. This should not be ignored and considera-
■	 Tachypnoea tion should be given to stopping the relevant drugs 
■	 Chest pain as well as to clear dietary advice.
■	 Urinary frequency
■	 Faintness and light-headedness, dizziness History of psychiatric disorder
■	 Blurred vision, dry mouth Inquiry should be made about the lifelong history of 
■	 Fatigue mental health problems. The questions need to be 
■	 Pins and needles, tremor asked in terms the patient will understand. For 
■	 Diarrhoea example, you could ask ‘Have you ever had any 
■	 Abdominal discomfort, ‘butterflies in stomach’ problems with your nerves or mental health in the 
■	 Nausea and vomiting past?’ or ‘Have you ever suffered with a very low 
■	 Flushes or pallor, sweating mood or with worrying too much or had any kind 
■	 Insomnia, classically difficulty getting off to sleep of nervous breakdown?’ Ask about previous contact 

with mental health, counselling or psychology services. 
In women who have had children, inquire as to 
whether they experienced any mental health problems 

Box 8.4  Psychic symptoms of anxiety during or after pregnancy. Ask about previous use of 
■	 Feelings of anxiety psychotropic medication: ‘Have you ever been pre-
■	 Irritability scribed any medication for your nerves or mental 
■	 Inability to relax health, for example, taken an antidepressant, sedative 
■	 Inability to concentrate or sleeping tablet?’ Establish what previous medication 
■	 Worry/anxious rumination has been effective in similar episodes or any medica-
■	 Feeling of impending doom tion to which they have reacted adversely. Establish 
■	 Depersonalisation whether the patient is currently in contact with any 
■	 Panic episodes (sudden onset of panic, sense of doom, mental health professionals.

fears of dying/collapsing/having a heart attack, with 
pounding heart and/or shortness of breath and Past medical history
hyperventilation, with an urge to flee one’s situation) Inquire about any current or previous physical health 

problems, including operations. Note childhood 
operations or chronic childhood illness, which can 
be pointers to a tendency to somatise (i.e. to experi-

If there is a distinct sleep problem, you should ask ence physical symptoms when anxious or distressed). 
about sleep-related behaviours (e.g. bedtime routines, Any chronic debilitating conditions or acute life-
if children share the bed) or phenomena such as threatening events, such as a myocardial infarction, 
sleepwalking or hypnagogic hallucinations (see below). are important risk factors for depressive and anxiety 
Establish if sleep is refreshing. Chronic fatigue patients disorders. A number of neurological illnesses have 
describe unrefreshing sleep and waking still tired, but important psychiatric manifestations. Ask about all 
this is also seen in patients with anxiety. Even so, contacts with health services. Frequent consultations 
most patients underestimate how much sleep they with many different specialists for a variety of 
actually get. symptoms in the absence of a definite medical 

Ask if the patient’s appetite has changed. In typical diagnosis indicate a distinct somatoform disorder.
depression appetite is poor, but in atypical depression 
there may be an increase in appetite and a craving Current medication
for carbohydrate-rich foods. Some patients without 
depression will describe eating to cope with brief Record all the medication a patient is currently taking 
episodes of low mood or to cope with upsetting (including over-the-counter medications, any recently 
events. Ask if the patient’s weight has changed. ‘borrowed medications’ and herbal products). Overuse 
Significant weight loss (more than 5%) in a depressed of some over-the-counter medications can exacerbate 
patient indicates moderate to severe depression. a problem (e.g. analgesic overuse headache). Record 
Weight increases can indicate a major problem of any allergies clearly.
mood-related eating or bulimia (impulsive eating and 
self-induced vomiting), while very low weight may Family history
indicate anorexia nervosa (morbid fear of weight gain Ask about parents: their ages, whether they are alive 
and severe weight loss). and, if so, whether they have any physical or mental 

Cycling of weight gain and loss can occur in eating health problems, where they live and the nature of 
disorders, such as bulimia and anorexia. It is also very the patient’s current relationship with them. Inquire 



104 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿
about the parents’ occupations and personalities and and relationships with parents or alternative caregivers 
the patient’s relationship with them during childhood. such as grandparents or foster carers. It is important 
Establish if the parents are separated or divorced and, to note any periods of separation from parents and 
if so, how old the patient was at the time. If the the quality of alternative caregivers. Inquire about 
parents have died, inquire into when they died, their and record any loss of parents or other caring figures 
age at death, the circumstances of their death, how through death, separation or divorce. These factors 
old the patient was at the time and how the patient are important in understanding whether there has 
has coped with the grieving process. been any early disruption of attachment bonds for 

Establish how many siblings there are, whether full the individual. Childhood health is important. Ask 
or half siblings, and the patient’s order in the family. about operations, hospitalisation or chronic illness in 
As for the parents, inquire into any siblings’ mental childhood and about family attitudes to any illness. 
and physical health, place of living, marital status, Asking how much time was missed off school due 
occupation, personality and the patient’s relationship to illness is a good indicator of childhood health, 
with them. whether organic or non-organic. A happy childhood 

Some family structures can be very complicated, can be covered quickly, with more time spent explor-
with parental separations, remarriages or re- ing causes of an unhappy childhood experience.
partnerships and half- or stepsiblings from different Specifically ask about physical or sexual abuse. This 
parental relationships. In this situation, it can be may seem difficult at first as these feel like taboo 
helpful to draw a family tree and annotate it with topics. Make sure the questions are in an appropriate 
the above information. Circles are used for women, context (i.e. when inquiring about the patient’s 
squares for men; a line through the symbol denotes experience of childhood). Then you can ask, in a 
death. Marriage or permanent liaisons are indicated matter of fact though sensitive way, questions such 
by a line connecting the symbols and divorce or as the following:
permanent separation by two oblique lines through ■	 Did you ever have any experience of being 
the connecting line. badly treated as a child?

Considerable information can emerge about relation- ■	 Were you ever neglected and not provided with 
ships with parents, siblings, etc. while taking the adequate physical care?
family history, which can be explored further in the ■	 Was anyone persistently mean or cruel to you in 
personal history. Specifically inquire whether there what they said?
is any family history of mental health or psychological ■	 Were you ever hit?
problems. When considering the heritable component ■	 Were you ever physically abused in any way?
of a condition, obviously you are only interested ■	 Were you ever sexually abused by anyone as a 
in first-degree relatives and not in relatives by child?
marriage. If the rapport with a patient is poor for any reason, 

or if you are seeing a very psychotic disorganised 
Personal history patient, just asking a general question and deferring 
Birth and early developmental milestones  exploration may be better. Sometimes patients will 
(in most patients only a brief outline is required) indicate that they did experience abuse, in which 
This begins with inquiry about the patient’s birth. case it is important to test out sensitively how much 
Was it a normal delivery or were there any medical to explore this in an initial interview. It is usually 
interventions or birth complications requiring special- best not to do so, but useful to ascertain if this is the 
ist care? This is relevant to assess the possibility of first time abuse has been disclosed.
any early brain injury. It can also be relevant if there A patient who has undergone a period of therapy, 
were problems in early maternal bonding. Were for example, and has discussed abusive experiences 
developmental milestones reached within the normal at length beforehand may be comfortable recounting 
range (see Ch. 6). Patients may not have any knowl- such experiences at a first interview. A patient however 
edge about their birth and milestones. If a patient who has never disclosed such abuse before may find 
tells you about some problem surrounding their birth it difficult to discuss it at all, and an agreement to 
and early milestones, this may be significant and is talk more about this subsequently may be more 
worth recording. If no problems are identified, it is appropriate. Patients should never feel coerced, either 
possible that the patient just does not know. Clearly overtly or covertly, by the whole context of the 
an informant, such as the patient’s mother, may have interview to talk about issues which cause pain or 
more accurate information. distress. If they do, the interview itself can feel like 

an abusive experience.
Family milieu, childhood health and early 
relationships with caregivers Schooling
Start with an open question such as ‘How do you A person’s experience of school can be very important 
remember your childhood?’ ‘Was it a happy or in terms of understanding the development of their 
unhappy time of life?’ Cover the family atmosphere peer relationships and indicating whether there 
during early upbringing, relationships between parents were any behaviour problems as well as finding out 



SECTION Two
105

Psychiatric assessment ﻿
what educational level has been attained. Inquire and personality. Ask about his current job (if the 
about both primary and secondary school, what patient is employed) such as the hours worked, what 
sort of schools were attended, whether school was it involves and if it is enjoyable as well as any particular 
enjoyable and any experience of bullying. Likewise, current work stressors. If a patient is unemployed, 
things enjoyed, peer relationships, ease of friendships establish when he last worked and the reasons for 
and whether friends from school are still part of not working (e.g. illness, redundancy).
the friendship group should be inquired about. 
Truancy, school refusal, exclusions from school and Psychosexual history, including marital/
referral to any children’s service are all important relationship history and children
to clarify. The psychosexual history can be a source of embar-

Truancy refers to a child missing school deliberately, rassment for students and patients, but this is unneces-
usually without parental knowledge, and doing sary if handled in a straightforward way. If there is a 
something else such as working or playing with other problem, patients may even be relieved to be asked 
truants. School refusal describes a situation in which about this, since they may have been afraid to mention 
a child stays at home refusing to go to school despite such a topic. Many psychotropic drugs have psycho-
persuasion from parents, usually due to an anxiety sexual side effects (e.g. erectile dysfunction or loss 
disorder. Sometimes parents keep children at home of libido with some antidepressants), but patients 
due to the parent’s health or practical needs (the often do not mention such side effects unless asked. 
parent may need practical help due to physical illness How much detail is needed will vary depending on 
or with looking after other children). the presenting complaint. Obviously, if the patient 

Establish the patient’s level of academic achieve- is complaining of marital or psychosexual difficulties, 
ment (qualifications attained). Ask about further a full history of this area is relevant. The level of 
education or training on leaving school and their detail outlined in Box 8.5 is usually not necessary, 
experience of this (college or university). Further but you should routinely gather basic details of the 
education is an important point in a person’s devel- psychosexual history. In the relationship history, do 
opmental trajectory as it is often the point at which not make an assumption about sexual orientation. 
an individual starts to live independently. How Ask about sexual orientation in an open non-
successfully this major milestone is negotiated is an judgemental way. Look for patterns that may be 
important indicator of psychological health and can indicative of relationship problems (lots of brief 
reveal information about emotional attachments and 
functioning. Inquire specifically about the transition 
from home to living independently, even if not for 
further education, or whether the patient still lives 
in the parental home. Box 8.5  The psychosexual history

Time may not allow all aspects of schooling to be 
■	 Women: age at menarche, menstrual history, sex 

covered but always record age at start and end education at home/school
of full-time education, any problems encountered 

■	 Men: puberty, sex education at home/school
and the highest level of qualifications attained. 

■	 For both sexes, a full sexual history would also cover 
This information can be important in evaluation of sexual fantasies, masturbation and deviant sexual 
cognitive state. behaviour (this level of detail is inappropriate unless 

the problem is specifically a psychosexual one)
Occupational history ■	 Boyfriends/girlfriends in adolescence, age at first sexual 
Take a history of the first job patients have had after relationship

■
their education, what other jobs they have had, how 	 Marital history: age at marriage, how they met, parental 
long they have stayed in those and the reasons for attitude to marriage and quality of marital relationship 
leaving. It is not necessary to go into exhaustive detail, – confiding, conflict, separations. Establish age, 
but it is important to establish if the individual is occupation and health of spouse. How and why 
able to sustain long-term periods of employment. relationships ended

■
Use a shortened approach by asking about total 	 Current relationship: any conflict? What is the partner’s 
number of jobs, longest period of employment and attitude to the patient’s illness? Are they supportive?

■
highest level of employment, longest period of 	 Children: how many, names, ages, who the biological 
unemployment, difficulties at work and relationships parents are, who cares for them. Any worries about the 
at work. If a pattern emerges of frequent job switches children’s health, behaviour, schooling or relationships 
after brief periods of employment, it is important to with the patient

■
establish the reason for this pattern: is there a pattern 	 Reproductive history in women: did they get pregnant 
of repeated behaviour (e.g. getting bored) or a par- easily? Fertility treatment? Were the pregnancies 
ticular problem (e.g. difficulty with authority figures planned? History of miscarriages, terminations of 
or other problems in interpersonal relationships). pregnancy or stillbirths. Mental health problems during 
This can give important information about ability pregnancy or after childbirth or related to menstruation



106 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿
relationships, a repeated pattern in intimate relation- called the CAGE (Box 8.10). Alcohol misuse is 
ships, repeatedly entering into abusive relationships). drinking which causes physical, social or psychological 
Be aware of domestic violence and the need to ask harm to the drinker. Alcohol dependence is said to 
about this if there is a very difficult or aggressive exist when the criteria for a dependence syndrome 
relationship. Basic details about children (also in Box are met (Box 8.9).
8.5) can be important later if child-protection issues 
are raised.

Box 8.8  Features suggesting alcohol misuse
Current social situation (Box 8.6) ■	 Excessive consumption (if acknowledged)

■	 Secret drinking and drinking alone
Forensic history ■	 Morning drinking
Details of a full forensic history are beyond the scope ■	 Amnesia for events (i.e. blackouts) during episode of 
of this chapter. It is useful to inquire routinely if the drinking
patient has ever been in any trouble with the police. ■	 Drunk driving convictions or other alcohol-related crime
You should then record the nature of any charges, ■	 Violent behaviour related to consumption
court appearances, convictions and prison sentences. ■	 Marital problems related to consumption
It is particularly important to record in detail, highlight ■	 Employment problems related to consumption
and pass information to other health professionals ■	 Alcohol-related physical illness (e.g. abnormal liver 
about violent offences. As noted above, the best disease, neuropathy) or abnormal investigations such as 
predictor of future violent behaviour is past violence, raised gamma GT or MCV
and there is a real risk that this information gets ■	 Patient is evasive or vague when questioned about 
buried in notes and forgotten. intake

■	 Patient in a high-risk occupation, e.g. bar worker, 
Use of alcohol and non-prescribed  publican, armed forces, entertainers, journalists, 
recreational drugs company directors
Alcohol ■	 Family history of alcohol problems

■
Ascertain quantity and frequency of alcohol intake. 	 Any of the features of dependence listed in Box 8.9
If the level of alcohol use is above safe drinking limits 
(Box 8.7), or if there are other indicators of a problem 
with alcohol (Box 8.8), a full drinking history should Box 8.9  Features of alcohol dependence
be taken and symptoms of alcohol dependence should ■	 A strong desire or sense of compulsion to drink alcohol 
be sought (Box 8.9). A very brief and commonly (craving)
used screen for alcohol dependence is a questionnaire ■	 Difficulty controlling intake of alcohol in terms of not 

being able to control starting, stopping or amount taken
■	 Withdrawal symptoms when alcohol intake is reduced or 

Box 8.6  Current social situation stopped and drinking to relieve withdrawal symptoms
■	 Tolerance, i.e. increased amount of alcohol is required to 

■	 Type of accommodation: council, private rented or achieve same effects as previously obtained with a 
homeowner, any problems lower amount

■	 Who else lives in the home, quality of relationship with ■	 Neglect of alternative activities when drinking or 
them, whether the partner is very possessive recovering, e.g. leisure activities, work, time spent with 

■	 Friends and social support: with whom does he confide family
and share problems? ■	 Continued drinking despite harm caused (either 

■	 Financial situation: earnings, debts, benefits, worries physical, mental or social)
■	 Locality: are they settled in the community? Is it familiar 

to them? Happy to live there, or wanting to move?

Box 8.10  The CAGE questionnaire
■

Box 8.7  Units of alcohol and safe drinking limits 	 C – Have you ever felt you needed to Cut down on your 
drinking?

1 unit contains 10 g of pure alcohol and is equal to half a ■	 A – Have people Annoyed you by criticising your 
pint of beer, one small glass of table wine or one bar drinking?
measure of spirits (for more detail, see Box 1.12): ■	 G – Have you ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking?
■	 Safe limits (debated still): ■	 E – Have you ever had a drink first thing in the morning 

–	 men <21 units/week to steady your nerves or get rid of a hangover 
–	 women <14 units/week (Eye-opener)?

■	 High risk of social/health problems: Two or more positive replies are indicative of alcohol 
–	 men >50 units/week misuse and should lead the interviewer to take a full 
–	 women >35 units/week drinking history.



SECTION Two
107

Psychiatric assessment ﻿
Taking a full drinking history Box 8.11  Personality assessment
You need to obtain as accurately as possible an 
estimate of the quantity, type and pattern of alcohol ■	 Usual mood
consumption as well as the effects of alcohol on ■	 Pessimistic and worrying or optimistic. Stable mood or 
day-to-day life. Patients are frequently in denial and mood swings.
will underestimate their intake. The most efficient ■	 Relationships with others
way to take the history is to ask about a typical ■	 Deep and enduring or superficial short-term 
drinking day or week. Go through the day ascertaining relationships, quality of marriage, work relationships, 
type, quantity and context of alcohol intake. Cover conflict with authority figures.
the features listed in Boxes 8.8 and 8.9 to establish ■	 Character
if there is alcohol misuse or dependence. Never forget ■	 How they describe themselves, e.g. shy, sensitive, 
that most patients underestimate their alcohol intake introvert, extrovert, quarrelsome, laid back, dependent, 
by at least 50%. controlling. Any obsessional traits, e.g. tidy, rigid.

After establishing current drinking level and ■	 Leisure activities and habits (including drug and alcohol 
problems, ask about the lifetime history of drinking use)
such as when the patient started drinking, pattern ■	 Risk-taking activities, collecting, passive spectator or 
over the years, episodes of dependent drinking, previ- active participant, solitary pursuits or very sociable, 
ous attempts to abstain and previous treatment for party going, time spent on leisure versus workaholic
alcohol problems. Remember, alcohol use is often an ■	 Personal standards and attitudes
attempt by the patient to self-medicate other psy- ■	 Religious beliefs and participation, moral views, 
chiatric disorders such as depression, anxiety or attitudes to health and body, level of acculturation (if 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). from an ethnic minority), e.g. traditional or Western 

attitudes, dress
Recreational drugs
Routine inquiry should be made into previous or 
current use of recreational drugs (and do not forget The mental state examination
excessive coffee intake). The question can follow on The MSE is the cornerstone of the psychiatric assess-
from inquiry about medication using a question such ment. It enables a systematic observation of clinical 
as ‘Have you ever used any other non-prescribed symptoms and signs on which a differential diagnosis 
drugs, such as cannabis (‘pot’, ‘ganja’), cocaine, is based. Students often feel that they do not know 
amphetamines (‘speed’), LSD (‘acid’) or anything where to start and it seems a very unfamiliar genre. 
like that?’ The phrase ‘designer drugs’ or ‘recreational However, in essence it is simple: look at and listen 
drugs’ can be used, judging the appropriate terminol- to the patient carefully and observe in a systematic 
ogy for the patient. The criteria for drug dependence way. The examination is a word portrait of how the 
and problem drug use are the same as those for patient appears, using clinical observation, informed 
alcohol. The same structure can be used for taking questioning, empathic listening and accurate recording. 
a history of drug misuse as was outlined for alcohol, It is helpful sometimes to take verbatim notes of 
with the addition of inquiring about method of what the patient says and record these in quotation 
administration of the drug. This can lead on to asking marks.
about needle sharing, source of needles, HIV and Observations and interpretations should be recorded 
hepatitis C status. Taking a full substance misuse separately. An MSE consisting solely of the doctor’s 
history can be complex and time consuming if patients interpretations is of little use. For example, a patient 
are polysubstance abusers, since often they will be may say that the police are in a conspiracy against 
vague about how much they have been using of each him and are monitoring his flat with listening devices 
drug, but each drug must be dealt with in turn. in the walls. It is inadequate just to record that the 

patient has paranoid delusions. It may not be a delu-
Personality assessment sion. It could be true, or he could be intentionally 
Do not rely too heavily on a patient’s self-assessment creating fantasy stories. The record should include 
of personality, although it is important to hear how what the patient actually says and then state ‘This 
he views himself. Depressed patients may paint a belief seems to be a delusion’. A basic comprehensive 
picture of themselves as incompetent, blameworthy structure is outlined in Box 8.12 with a detailed 
and lacking in confidence, which may be far from outline of what should be recorded under each 
their premorbid personality. To avoid such misrep- heading.
resentations, try to rely on objective information in 
the history, and where possible talk to an informant Appearance and behaviour
who knows the patient well and what he is usually 
like. The important areas to cover in assessing per- Appearance
sonality are shown in Box 8.11. In this area of Describe how patients appear and whether their 
assessment a collateral history is mandatory. dress and general presentation seems appropriate for 



108 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.12  The mental state examination visual hallucinations (looking away suddenly) or 
tactile hallucinations (reacting as if hit or bitten).

■	 Appearance and behaviour
■	 Speech Rapport
■	 Mood: subjective and objective Does the patient engage comfortably or seem nervous, 
■	 Thought: form and content awkward and troubled with the interview? He may 
■	 Perception be warm or indifferent, suspicious, ingratiating, dis-
■	 Cognitive assessment: including orientation, attention missive, supercilious or hostile. The patient’s way of 

and concentration, registration and short-term memory, relating to you could be defined by personality or 
recent memory, remote memory, intelligence, abstraction mental illness. Patients with severe depression may 

■	 Insight be apathetic and indifferent. Those with schizophrenia 
may be suspicious and hostile. Patients with mania 
may be dismissive, impatient and supercilious, being 
readily irritated by the interruption of whatever 

their age, culture, occupation and social class. Severe important task they may be engaged in.
weight loss (e.g. ill-fitting clothes) may indicate the 
loss of appetite as a result of depression or even Eye contact
dementia or failure to eat because of delusional ideas Does the patient establish good eye contact, exhibit 
or anorexia. It may represent simple social disorganisa- an avoidant gaze or look suspiciously around? There 
tion in those with schizophrenia, or it may be due may even be an abnormal staring eye contact or a 
to a distinct physical illness. Excess weight by contrast hostile frown or grimace when looking at people. 
can also occur in schizophrenic illness (secondary to Wearing dark glasses indoors may just be fashionable 
medication, typically) or can indicate an eating dis- but could imply a sense of fearfulness, a visual problem 
order such as bulimia or excessive alcohol intake (in or, not uncommonly, drug withdrawal.
some people). Poor self-care indicated by body odour, 
lack of shaving and dirty clothes can be due to depres- Gait
sion, or patients with schizophrenia or dementia may Note any abnormalities of gait when a patient walks 
become too disorganised and lose the capacity to in. There may be a manneristic gait (see mannerisms 
care for themselves. below) where the patient walks in an exaggerated 

A lowered level of consciousness indicates an organic posing way. There may be functional gait problems, 
brain disorder. Suspected altered consciousness should so look for inconsistencies in what can be done when 
be checked out early on with tests of orientation, as a patient is asked to walk and what may be elicited 
the interpretation of the MSE will be different if the on examination. Asking someone to walk as if on a 
patient is confused or severely cognitively impaired. tightrope, heel to toe, can clarify whether or not they 
This situation calls for a simplified interview, with are ataxic.
careful observation of behaviour and an attempt to 
interview an informant. Reduced motor activity

In bradykinesia (patients seeming to act in slow 
Behaviour motion), voluntary movements are reduced and 
Essentially this is a description of how the patient abnormally slow. The face and arms tend to be 
behaves, in relation to the environment and the particularly affected. Bradykinesia is most commonly 
interviewer. Is the behaviour socially appropriate or caused by parkinsonism due to Parkinson’s disease 
is it unusual in some way? Included in this section or medication, particularly antipsychotics. Slowness 
would be the following: and paucity of movement may also occur in psycho-

motor retardation, which is a feature of depression 
General demeanour and indicates quite severe depression. In stupor, 
Is the patient relaxed or anxious? Is he agitated there is severe paucity of movement and mutism. 
(fiddling or wringing hands), angry or behaving as This occurs in severe depression, catatonia and 
though suspicious? Patients with severe depression organic brain disease. Catatonia is characterised by a 
may be slow to respond or (paradoxically) may need stuporous state with additional features (see Boxes 
to pace about, unable to stay still because of agitation. 8.13 and 8.14).
Excitability due to mania or schizophrenia looks like 
agitation although will usually be more disorganised. Increased motor activity
Angry or suspicious behaviour may be due to persecu- Note any excessive activity and whether it is purpose-
tory delusions, without any natural fear of being ful or not. Manic patients may just be overactive 
examined. A distracted or preoccupied patient may and distractible. Agitation has a different quality, 
just be very anxious (due to inner fearfulness or being driven by an unpleasant inner sense of 
fearful thoughts) or may be experiencing auditory tension. It is a general restlessness in which there 
hallucinations or may be seen actively responding to may be apparently purposeful activity but it is not 
auditory hallucinations (e.g. muttering inexplicably), carried through properly. There may be repetitive 



SECTION Two
109

Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.13  Movement changes in the mental state purposeless behaviour such as hand-wringing, scratch-
examination ing, rubbing hands on knees and pacing up and down. 

See Box 8.13.
■	 Dystonia: due to older major antipsychotic drugs
■	 Choreiform: Huntington’s chorea – common with L-dopa Speech

therapy (for Parkinson’s disease)
■	 Tics: quite frequent in childhood and during periods of This is divided into two components: rate and 

emotional stress structure of speech.
■	 Mannerisms: Rate

–	 habitual repetitive voluntary movements or behaviour 
patterns Slowed speech with a long latency between question 

–	 can be part of normal behaviour, e.g. frequent and answer may be a component of psychomotor 
raising of eyebrows retardation in depression; it can occur in dementia 

–	 bizarre occurrences in schizophrenia, e.g. saluting or in psychosis due to distraction by hearing voices 
frequently or raising one leg every few strides. They or in the very anxious patient. Lack of spontaneous 
can be voluntarily controlled speech occurs in depression, as a negative symptom 

■	 Stereotypies: repeated uniform movements or utterances, of schizophrenia and in some dementias. It may be 
purposeless (unlike mannerisms), regularly occurring due to expressive aphasia caused by a cerebral lesion. 
(unlike unpredictable tics), e.g. rocking to and fro on a There may be excessive spontaneous speech, as in a 
chair. Stereotypies are found most commonly in patients manic patient or also in some dementias, where there 
with learning difficulties is a loss of appropriate social understanding of recipro-

■	 Tardive dyskinesia: syndrome of abnormal movements, cal speech. ‘Pressure of speech’ refers to an increase 
e.g. facial grimaces, writhing movements, abnormal in both the rate and amount of speech, characterised 
rolling of tongue. It can be a delayed side effect of older in particular by patients being very difficult to inter-
antipsychotic medication. Onset may be months or years rupt, and is typical of manic states. Sometimes speech 
after starting the medication and, paradoxically, it can is so pressured and driven that it becomes incom-
worsen initially after stopping it prehensible. By contrast, mute patients will not speak 

■	 Catatonia: (see also Box 8.14) striking condition at all, as in states of stupor due to severe depression, 
characterised by stupor, sometimes alternating with schizophrenia or organic brain disease but occasionally 
excited motor and behavioural features. Motor excitation as a hysterical symptom. Elective mutism (the patient 
can be extreme and lead to injury or exhaustion, which will speak in some situations but not in others) occurs 
can be lethal mostly in children.

Structure
This can be disrupted in a variety of ways and due 
to a range of disorders (Box 8.15).

Other abnormalities of speech that should be noted 
are any evidence of dysphasia or dysarthria, which 

Box 8.14  Variable features of catatonia would indicate neurological disease, or that may be 
■	 Waxy flexibility: the patient maintains a posture in which due to drug or alcohol side effects.

he has been placed by the examiner
■	 Negativism: the patient seems to behave in the opposite Mood

way to that requested by the examiner
■	 Aversion: the patient turns away when addressed This is usually divided into subjective and objective 
■	 Mannerisms: see Box 8.13 mood. Some clinicians separate mood (‘My description 
■	 Grimacing: common in schizophrenia. Schnauzkrampf is of how I feel’) from affect (how the patient’s mood 

a facial grimace in which the nose is wrinkled down and affects the interviewer). For subjective mood, record 
the lips drawn up towards it in a pout how the patient actually feels, for example ‘I’m really 

■	 Stereotypies: see Box 8.13 fed up’, or ‘I’m feeling sad’ etc. It is most useful to 
■	 Posturing: the patient adopts an unusual posture for a record this verbatim. Interpreting mood is particularly 

prolonged period, e.g. symbolic like a cross difficult in people whose first language is not English, 
■	 Automatic obedience: the patient shows excessive given the limited range of mood-related terms in 

compliance (opposite of negativism) other languages.
■	 Echopraxia: the patient exactly imitates the interviewer Ask an open question first, for example ‘How have 
■	 Advertence: the patient frequently turns to the you been feeling in yourself?’ or ‘How have your 

interviewer in an exaggerated way spirits been lately?’ If there is no clear response, ask 
■	 Mitgehen: the interviewer can move the patient’s limbs a more closed question: ‘Have you been feeling low, 

with fingertip pressure sad or miserable recently?’ or ‘Have you been feeling 
■	 Ambitendence: the patient will start and then reverse a depressed?’

movement, e.g. putting out a hand and withdrawing it If the patient acknowledges low mood, you should 
explore severity and persistence. Persistently low 



110 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.15  Disorders of structure of speech distressing. Such psychological numbness is seen in 
depression, depersonalisation and (as a key symptom) 

■	 Circumstantial: frequent digressions, taking a long time in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
to get to the point (‘over-inclusive thinking’), as in OCD An objective assessment of mood should be 
or forms of epilepsy and organic brain disorders recorded, for example whether a patient is distinctly 

■	 Tangentiality: answers seem unrelated or only slightly depressed, anxious or angry. An overall level of 
related to questions, e.g. in schizophrenia, severe wellbeing may be helpful on a rough self-rating scale 
anxiety of 1/10 to 10/10 to enable patients to sum up their 

■	 Disorders of the form of thought: abnormality of the overall outlook. Observe and record objective indica-
structure of thought manifest in speech. There are three tors of mood during the interview, for example body 
main types of formal thought disorder – flight of ideas, language, and facial expressions (e.g. weeping, frowning 
loosening of associations or perseveration: or laughter). Opinion varies as to whether biological 
–	 Flight of ideas: speech jumps from one idea to an symptoms of depression or somatic symptoms of 

associated one but with loss of the end goal. The anxiety should be recorded in the mental state or as 
associations can be based on meaning or on part of the history.
similarities of sound (‘clang associations’), for Important features of mood to observe are variation 
example ‘head – red – dead in bed’. and whether it is appropriate to the circumstance. 

–	 Loosening of associations: jumps from one idea into Mood may be appropriately reactive to what is being 
another apparently unrelated one, making described, or a persistently low mood may indicate 
understanding very difficult, e.g. ‘Knight’s Move’ severe depression. Mood may be excessively reactive 
speech in schizophrenia and, in extreme forms, a and labile, switching from laughing and joking to 
mixture of unrelated words (‘word salad’) floods of tears, which is strongly associated with 

–	 Perseveration: repetition of a theme or answer when organic brain disease and sometimes manic-depressive 
no longer appropriate (in ‘echolalia’, the patient illness. Incongruous affect (e.g. a patient laughing 
repeats what the interviewer says), e.g. in organic while talking about his baby’s death) is a feature of 
brain disease and some forms of schizophrenia schizophrenia. It can be worth asking a patient why 

he smiled or laughed while discussing something 
upsetting. Blunting of affect, also seen in schizophrenia, 

mood indicates more severe depression than mood describes the loss of the normal variation of mood.
which is reactive to events. Is it worse at any time 
of day? Feeling very depressed on waking with mood Thought
lifting later is called diurnal mood variation and is a 
good marker for significant depression. Thoughts Attention should be paid to both the way people 
related to depression are considered below. think as well as thought content. Thought form (when 

To assess elated mood after the initial open question impaired this is known as ‘formal thought disorder’) 
about mood, ask ‘Have you been feeling in very good refers to whether a patient’s thoughts are ordered in 
spirits, unusually happy or very elated for no reason a logical way or whether his thinking jumps about, 
recently?’ If the patient says yes, you can ask with discontinuities and moving from topic to topic, 
‘What is that like? Can you describe it to me?’ Do making it hard for the listener to follow or understand. 
not take what patients say at face value; always try (Such a reaction in the interviewer in itself is often 
to get a good description of what they are actually diagnostic, just like feeling a lump when examining 
experiencing. Thoughts related to an elated mood the abdomen.) In particular it is the flow of a patient’s 
are considered below. speech that will indicate the presence of thought 

Inquire about irritability, as this often accompanies disorder, and these abnormalities of form of thought 
a lowered mood and can occur both in depression have therefore been described above in the section 
and mania. Its effects may be noted only by taking on speech. However, the presence of formal thought 
a collateral history, for example, from a partner. If disorder should be recorded in this section.
present, explore its severity and in particular note Attention should be paid to the content and theme 
any related physical violence, for example domestic of what patients discuss, as it gives a window into 
violence, and there may also be child protection what is on their minds. Consider the overall theme 
issues. Inquire also about anxiety: ‘Have you been of what is being discussed as this will indicate mood 
feeling very nervous, frightened or shaky recently?’ (e.g. depressive, manic, persecutory). Often the content 
A particular type of anxious foreboding accompanies of thought will have already emerged from the history 
both anxiety and depression, and in this the patient taking. However, there are some questions worth 
constantly feels a sense of dread, as though something asking to explore specific issues in more detail or to 
awful is going to happen, while also being perplexed raise them if they have not already come up.
since it is not clear what this might be. The exploration of depressive thoughts is described 

Sometimes patients describe a sense of feeling flat in Box 8.16. It is important always to establish whether 
and numb. They may describe no longer feeling love or not a patient experiences suicidal thoughts, and 
for a spouse or child, and this in itself they find this is part of risk assessment. It is negligent to perform 



SECTION Two
111

Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.16  Exploration of depressive thoughts Box 8.17  Features suggesting increased risk of suicidal 
Guilt behaviour
■	 Do you ever feel guilty about anything, or blame yourself ■	 Previous self-harm, especially:

for things or feel ashamed? –	 poison
Self-esteem/self-worth –	 stabbing

–	 hanging
■	 What is your opinion of yourself compared to other –	 jumping from heights

people? –	 falling under vehicles
■	 Are you as good as other people?

■	 Continuing suicidal thoughts
■	 Do you run yourself down?

■	 Current depressive or schizophrenic psychosis
Hopelessness ■	 Male, aged over 40 years
■	 How do you see the future? ■	 Social isolation, especially in adolescence or the recently 
■	 Do you ever feel hopeless about your situation? bereaved or divorced

■
Suicidal thoughts 	 Chronic painful illness

■	 Alcoholism and drug abuse
A good time to ask these questions is after exploring ■	 Family history of suicide
depressive cognitions with the questions suggested above. 
It is best to ask about suicidal feelings with a graded 
series of questions:
■	 Do things ever get so bad that you feel you don’t want Box 8.18  Exploring thoughts in elevated mood

to carry on?
■	 Do you ever wish you did not wake up in the morning ■	 You may find some of these questions a bit unusual and 

(passive suicidal feelings)? they don’t apply to everyone, but I need to ask them just 
■	 Do you ever have thoughts about doing something to to check whether you have had any of these experiences:

harm yourself? –	 Do you ever feel as though you can do some things 
■	 Do you ever have thoughts about ending your own life? much better than other people?

–	 Have you seemed especially efficient at work or in 
other activities?

a psychiatric assessment without a basic risk assess- –	 Do you ever feel you have special abilities, talents or 
ment. Medical students and doctors may feel powers which other people do not have?
uncomfortable asking about suicidal ideas or may –	 Have you got any new projects in mind or new plans 
fear that asking about suicidal thoughts increases the for the future?
likelihood that the patient will act upon them. –	 Have you ever had the thought that you may be a 
Research has shown that the opposite is the case. special person and, if so, who?
Patients are often relieved to share these feelings and –	 Have you had thoughts of doing rather reckless 
welcome this opportunity. things which are out of character and you would not 

Some patients self-harm for reasons other than normally do, for example planning to spend a lot of 
wanting to end their life. For example, patients may money on a shopping spree, or thinking of starting 
deliberately self-harm by cutting themselves as a way affairs or relationships which may not be wise?
of getting a sense of release from unpleasant emotions, 
or they may overdose to draw attention to their 
distress. A suitable question covering both suicidal 
ideas and self-harm might be ‘Have you ever had while you are taking a history and may have disin-
thoughts of harming yourself in any way, for example hibited behaviour. Specific questions to ask if they 
by taking too many tablets or by cutting yourself?’ have not already come up are listed in Box 8.18.

It is important to pursue a risk assessment to 
determine the likelihood of a patient acting on Obsessional thoughts
thoughts of suicide or self-harm. Ask what he has Obsessional thoughts are repeated, stereotyped 
thought of doing and whether he has done anything thoughts that intrude into a person’s mind – they 
specific to prepare (e.g. saving up tablets). Look for are usually experienced as unpleasant, silly and even 
protective factors by asking what it is that stops him irrational. Patients ask themselves ‘why do I keep 
from acting on his suicidal thoughts and how he thinking this?’ for example. Such thoughts are not 
copes with such thoughts. Box 8.17 summarises delusional, but the patient is unable to stop them 
important risk factors for completed suicide; the from occurring, despite attempts at resistance which 
student should know about and explore these in often produce anxiety. Patients are clear that these 
assessing risk. are their own thoughts, as distinct from the experience 

of thought insertion when there is a sense of something 
Exploring thoughts in elevated mood ‘not you’ being imposed on your mind. Common 
Patients with elevated mood states (mania or hypo- obsessional thoughts are those of contamination (e.g. 
mania) will often mention all kinds of grandiose ideas patients feel their hands are dirty and feel compelled 



112 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.19  Definition of delusion and overvalued ideas Box 8.20  Diagnosis of schizophrenia

A delusion is a fixed false belief, held with complete Schneider described what he called first-rank symptoms of 
conviction, which dominates a patient’s outlook, which is schizophrenia. The presence of any one symptom in the 
not amenable to alteration by any argument and which is absence of organic brain disease is regarded as diagnostic 
not shared by others of the same social and cultural of schizophrenia, but first-rank symptoms are not always 
background. present. This is not a comprehensive list of the clinical 

Overvalued ideas are beliefs which are intrusively features of schizophrenia, but they are symptoms which are 
prominent in the patient’s mind and with which he is quite specific to it (as long as there is no organic disease). 
unreasonably preoccupied (e.g. his hair does not feel right The first-rank symptoms are:
and needs constant attention), but the patient is able to 1	 Audible thoughts: auditory hallucination of hearing 
acknowledge that the belief may not be true and may be thoughts while thinking them (Gedankenlautwerden) or 
open to an alternative explanation. as an echo immediately after thinking them (echo de la 

pensée)
2	 Argumentative voices: two or more voices referring to 

constantly to wash them) or even infection (they the patient in the third person in an argumentative 
may reek of antiseptics), and many patients constantly manner, e.g. ‘He’s an odd sort of fellow’, ‘No, he is evil’
worry that they have not, for example, shut the front 3	 Auditory hallucinations of running commentary on 
door or locked all the windows before going out. The behaviour referring to the patient in the third person, 
compulsive motor act that accompanies the thought e.g. ‘Now he is opening the door’
(e.g. hand washing or door checking) is called an 4	 Thought insertion or thought withdrawal
obsessional ritual. 5	 Thought broadcasting

Obsessional thoughts and other obsessional phe- 6	 Passivity ‘made’ experiences, including impulses, 
nomena are part of the normal range of experience, feelings, and actions occurring without the patient 
and careful checking makes, for example, a good initiating or controlling them
clinician. However, when severe and disabling, they 7	 Delusional perception
form the central psychopathology in obsessional 
compulsive disorder (OCD), and it is important to 
ask screening questions for obsessional symptoms 
(which may not be volunteered, because of individual Box 8.21  Distinction between positive and negative 
embarrassment about such habits). If a patient symptoms of schizophrenia
acknowledges any of these problems, explore their Positive symptoms (i.e. experiences additional to the norm)
frequency, severity, and the attempts to resist and ■	 Tend to occur in the acute phase and generally respond 
the extent of functional disability as a result. For to antipsychotic medication
example, washing and checking rituals take time, ■	 Hallucinations including thought echo
people are late for work and some people find it hard ■	 Delusions, primary and secondary, including delusions 
even to leave the house. of thought control and passivity experiences

■	 Disturbance of emotional control – there may be 
Abnormal beliefs outbursts of emotion, e.g. laughter or anger, without 
The main types of abnormal belief are primary and appropriate cause
secondary delusions, overvalued ideas and sensitive ■	 Disturbed thinking with thought disorder or neologisms
ideas of reference (Box 8.19).

Primary delusions (also called true delusions) are Negative symptoms (i.e. loss of normal experiences)
delusions that are not secondary to other abnormal ■	 Tend to be chronic and accumulate as the illness 
mental processes such as abnormal mood or hallucina- progresses
tions. A particular example of a primary delusion is ■	 Poverty of speech – the patient has little to say and very 
a delusional perception in which a patient has a little spontaneous speech
normal perception to which is attached a delusional ■	 Poverty of thought and movement – speech indicates 
significance. For example, a patient may see a waiter loss of richness and complexity of thought. Movement is 
pick up a glass (a normal perception) and the patient lacking and slowed
realises immediately that the waiter is an envoy of ■	 Blunting of affect – absence of normal modulation of 
the devil (delusional significance). Primary delusions mood and lack of emotional response
are generally associated with schizophrenia provided ■	 Lack of volition – loss of motivation; can be extreme 
they occur in clear consciousness (i.e. they are not when patient neglects basic self-care
occurring in an organic confusional state). Indeed ■	 Social withdrawal
they are one of the Schneiderian first-rank symptoms 
of schizophrenia (see Boxes 8.20 and 8.21).

Secondary delusions (also called delusion-like ideas) 
are secondary to an abnormal mood state or hallucina-
tory experience. Unlike primary delusions, they are 



SECTION Two
113

Psychiatric assessment ﻿
understandable in the light of the patient’s mood ‘Have you felt that other people are too interested 
and life history. For example, a severely depressed in you?’, ‘Do you feel that people comment on you 
mother may become convinced that she is evil and or say things behind your back?’ or ‘Do people seem 
that she is not worthy to bring up her child. Secondary to drop hints for you or say things with double 
delusions lack diagnostic specificity but their content meaning?’
may relate to the diagnosis. When eliciting delusional beliefs, and because 

Sensitive ideas of reference can be described when psychotic symptoms are often very bizarre, it is wise 
patients falsely believe that things actually occurring to put patients at ease by making some kind of 
in their environment are specifically referring to normalising statement and asking a very open general 
themselves. These experiences typically occur in question first. For example, you might say ‘Some 
depression, body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), para- people find that when they are feeling very stressed 
noid states and paranoid personality types. For or having difficulties with how they are feeling, they 
example, patients may feel that others are looking have some rather odd experiences. Has anything very 
or laughing at them. In delusions of reference, patients odd or unusual happened to you recently?’ Follow 
are completely convinced that people are talking up on any positive responses with open questions, 
about and laughing at them (and may react). Some- asking the patient to describe experiences in detail. 
times patients will be convinced that a TV presenter If there are no positives, you can screen for certain 
is speaking directly to them or talking about them. sorts of delusions. Some of these, and suggested 
Questions to elicit these sorts of ideas might be screening questions, are given in Box 8.22.

Box 8.22  Types of delusional ideas
Persecutory delusions alcohol misuse), in schizophrenia and in people with a 
‘Do you ever have the feeling that people are against you or suspicious/possessive personality style. It is important to 
out to get you in some way?’ They may occur in organic take these delusional beliefs seriously and do a full risk 
psychoses such as confusional states, dementia, alcohol and assessment.
drug-induced psychoses, in stress-induced psychogenic Erotomanic delusions
psychoses and sometimes in people with paranoid Patients hold delusional beliefs that someone (usually 
personalities, particularly with advancing age and in whom famous) is in love with them. They occur mainly in 
sensory deficits such as visual and hearing impairment schizophrenia and in organic psychoses. They may lead to 
occur. They may also occur in schizophrenia. stalking behaviour, so take these delusions seriously and do 
Delusional misinterpretation a full risk assessment.
This is a type of delusion of reference. Patients will ascribe Fantastic delusions
particular significance to normal objects in their environment. These are bizarre delusions – for example, that aliens have 
For example, they will see a coded message intended for landed and are causing things to change in some way or they 
them in a car number plate. are involved in some other attempts to interfere with the 
Delusions of grandeur patient’s life. These occur in schizophrenia.
Patients are delusionally convinced that they are special in Delusional memory
some way, for example they have been given a special The patient describes remembering things which are clearly 
purpose by God or that they are famous. It is characteristic of delusional. For example, the patient remembers and can give 
syphilitic general paralysis of the insane (now rarely seen). graphic descriptions of being abducted by aliens and 
They can also occur in mania and schizophrenia but are experimented upon.
uncommon. Delusions of passivity
Hypochondriacal delusions These are a group of bizarre phenomena in which the core 
Patients believe that some part of their body is abnormal or experience is of loss of the normal sense of boundary 
diseased. This is common in depressive psychosis, as are between the self and the outside world (ego boundaries). 
delusions of guilt, self-blame and poverty. They include thought insertion (the experience that one’s 
Nihilistic delusions thoughts are not one’s own) and the accompanying belief 
Seen in severe psychotic depression, they involve a delusional that thoughts have been inserted into one’s mind; thought 
belief that parts of one’s body (internal organs usually) are broadcasting (where the patient experiences his mind as 
rotting away or even no longer exist (‘no stomach’). open to others so that thoughts can leave it and be picked 

up by others); and thought withdrawal (where patients feel 
Delusions of jealousy that thoughts are actually extracted from their heads). These 
This is a delusional conviction that one’s spouse or partner is experiences are very specific and, in the absence of organic 
being unfaithful. It occurs in substance misuse (especially brain disease, are diagnostic of schizophrenia.



114 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Perception (partial blindness or deafness) or a lowered level 
of consciousness (common in acute confusional 

There is a wide range of abnormal perceptual experi- states).
ences, some of which can be part of normal experience Hallucinations are perceptions that are not based 
and others which are indicative of mental illness or on any real external stimulus. They can occur in any 
organic disease of the brain. It may be obvious from sensory modality but the commonest are auditory, 
their behaviour that patients are seeing things or for example, a voice being heard by the patient but 
attending to auditory hallucinations (‘voices’). Gentle no one else hears it. Auditory hallucinations occur 
inquiry about what the patient sees or hears will in many disorders including schizophrenia, organic 
often elicit a description of the experience. Record brain disease and bipolar disorder. Voices can be heard 
as much detail as possible. Patients may be embar- speaking in the second or third person. In severe 
rassed to mention having had abnormal experiences, depression, voices are often second person and the 
so specific inquiry is needed. For patients who have content may be mood congruent, for example ‘Look 
not had these experiences, being asked about them at you, you’re useless, why not do away with yourself?’. 
can be quite threatening as they may feel the doctor By contrast, manic patients may hear God’s voice 
is suggesting they are ‘mad’. To deal with this, it may telling them they have special powers or that they 
be appropriate to make a normalising statement first, have been chosen to do something special. Third-
and then ask a screening question for abnormal person hallucinations (e.g. the patient being addressed 
perceptual experiences: ‘It is quite common for people as ‘He’ or ‘She’) in the absence of organic disease 
to have unusual experiences which may puzzle them. suggest schizophrenia (see Box 8.20 for first-rank 
For example, some people may hear noises, music or symptoms).
voices when there is no one there, or people may see Visual hallucinations are uncommon in psychiatric 
things which others are not able to see. Have you illness and are more suggestive of organic conditions, 
ever had any experiences like these?’ If the patient particularly an acute brain syndrome (e.g. delirium), 
has had such experiences, they can then be explored illicit drug use (e.g. LSD) or drug withdrawal (e.g. 
in more detail (Box 8.23). delirium tremens). However, they do occasionally 

occur in schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.
Abnormal perception Visual hallucinations vary from the elementary, for 
Abnormal perception can occur in any of the sensory example flashes of light (from visual pathways and 
modalities: hearing, vision, smell, taste and soma- the occipital lobe) to complex visions of objects or 
tosensory modalities (touch etc.). When perception scenes (from visual processing areas and the temporal 
is distorted, the perceived object is correctly recognised lobes). In confusional states, small animals are often 
but altered in some way, such as alteration of intensity seen, typically at the periphery of vision. In temporal 
of sound, quality, colour or distortions of form. These lobe epilepsy, complex visual hallucinations (scenic) 
occur in psychiatric disorders but also in many organic may occur as may polymodal ones (involving multiple 
conditions such as epileptic seizures or toxic/metabolic sensory modalities).
states or alcohol withdrawal. A well-known phenom- Hallucinations may also occur in other sensory 
enon, namely hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucina- modalities, for example olfactory, gustatory and tactile. 
tions (when you are falling asleep or waking up) does Some patients with epilepsy commonly have olfactory 
not usually indicate any kind of psychopathology, and gustatory hallucinations (smelling odd smells or 
but rather your brain being variably aware when tasting unusual tastes). These experiences often 
half-asleep/half-awake. precede an epileptic seizure. Patients with severe 

Illusions occur when the object is real but is depression may have olfactory hallucinations, perceiv-
misperceived, usually due to particular conditions in ing themselves as smelling unpleasant (cacosmia).
the perceptual environment, for example, an anxious Tactile hallucinations are difficult to distinguish 
person in a dimly lit street seeing a tree as a figure from illusions. In cocaine psychosis, patients may 
in pursuit. They are often caused by sensory deficit complain that insects are crawling over them (for-

mication). Patients with schizophrenia may describe 
tactile hallucinations which may be incorporated into 

Box 8.23  Details of hallucinations their delusional beliefs, for example, a patient may 
■	 When they started feel sensations on the skin and believe this is due 
■	 In what context to, for example, an animal or insect biting them. A 

specific subcategory of illness, delusional parasitosis, 
■	 Frequency
■	 Stereotypical or not leads to constant dermatological referrals and the 
■	 Disturbing/frightening or pleasant/amusing conviction of some persisting infestation. In the 
■	 Internal or external (auditory) absence of organic brain disease, tactile hallucinosis 
■	 Recognisable voice is otherwise a first-rank symptom of schizophrenia (see 
■	 What voices say (record verbatim) Box 8.20).
■	 Commands to do harm (part of risk assessment) Hallucinations can occur in the absence of mental 

illness, for example in extreme fatigue or in between 



SECTION Two
115

Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.24  Abnormal experiences of self and environment too disturbed, or there may be poor rapport, and 
some will resent an implication that there is something 

Déjà vu wrong with their brain. Even where formal cognitive 
Patients feel that they have been in their current situation testing is impossible or undesirable, a minimum 
before – it can be normal or occur in temporal lobe assessment should be attempted, as follows:
epilepsy. ■	 What is the patient’s level of consciousness?
Capgras’ syndrome ■	 Does it fluctuate?

■
The patient asserts that people are not who they claim to 	 Is he fully alert and behaving appropriately for 
be but are their double – occurs most commonly in the context?

■
schizophrenia but also in dementia. 	 Does he seem to be oriented to time, place and 

person?
Sense of a presence In the majority of patients, it is possible to conduct 
This reflects a sixth sense of someone being around but not a basic assessment of cognitive function. This should 
actually seen or heard. It is seen in schizophrenia, be preceded by an explanation that it is important 
drug-induced states and simple fatigue. for you to do a check of their memory and concentra-
Depersonalisation tion, with a normalising statement that this is routine 

with all patients.
An unpleasant sense that one is altered in some way and 
as if one is no longer completely real – patients will Basic assessment of cognitive function
struggle to describe it. Often a manifestation of heightened 
anxiety and occurs in depression and severe fatigue. A useful and commonly used semi-quantitative 

measure is the Mini-Mental State Examination 
Derealisation (MMSE) (Box 8.25). Scores are to some extent 
Patients say that their surroundings feel unreal or grey or dependent on educational level. The test has subcat-
colourless. Some patients say it is ‘as if’ they are on a egories related to orientation, registration, attention, 
stage set and the world no longer feels real. This often recall and language. The maximum score is 30, and 
accompanies depersonalisation, in a similar context of scores lower than 21 are associated with cognitive 
heightened anxiety, or depression or severe fatigue. impairment. The MMSE cannot differentiate multi

focal from diffuse organic brain disease, but it provides 
a useful baseline assessment of a patient’s cognitive 
performance.

sleep and waking, and can occur in bereaved individu- Level of consciousness
als, usually being experiences of either seeing or 
hearing the lost loved one and are generally experi- The patient’s level of alertness or, if unconscious, the 
enced as comforting. They are a normal part of grief level of unconsciousness, may be assessed. Some 
in some people and do not indicate psychopathology. patients have fluctuating levels of consciousness; the 
Some people complain that, when alone, they feel mental state may then fluctuate between lucidity 
the presence of someone else beside them. This may and gross abnormality. This is a manifestation of an 
occur in grief reactions, when the patient is frightened, acute organic confusional state. For a fuller account 
as a manifestation of hysteria or in organic brain of the examination of the unconscious patient, see 
disease and schizophrenia. Chapters 9 and 16.

Abnormal experiences of self and environment are 
listed in Box 8.24. Orientation
Cognition The patient’s orientation in time, place and person 

should be formally assessed by direct questioning 
An assessment of cognitive function is a routine and the answers written down verbatim. Disorienta-
part of any MSE. It is impossible to interpret the tion is an important sign of organic brain disease, 
significance of a variety of other symptoms, such as whether chronic or acute, but may also occur in 
hallucinatory experiences or paranoid ideas, unless a chronic institutionalised schizophrenics and in hysteri-
basic assessment has been done of the state of con- cal dissociative states.
sciousness and the presence of grossly normal brain 
function. In elderly people, or when organic brain Time
disease is suspected (e.g. in acute confusional states), 
the assessment of the cognitive state is the most Ask about the day, date, month, year and time of 
important part of the examination. day. If the patient does not know the month, ask 

It can be difficult to perform a full assessment of about the season. All patients should know the year 
cognitive function at a first interview, and in general and either the month or season and the approximate 
only an outline of concentration, orientation and time of day (e.g. morning, afternoon, evening or 
memory should be attempted. Many patients will be night). However, not knowing the exact date is not 



116 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Box 8.25  Mini-mental state examination Place
Orientation Patients should know where they are (e.g. home or 
1 point for each correct answer. hospital) and approximately where it is situated (e.g. 

What is the: what town or part of the town). They should know 
–	 time the way to places such as the bathroom or toilet. 
–	 date Some patients with acute confusional states may say 
–	 day they are in hospital but that the hospital is part of 
–	 month their own home.
–	 year?

(Maximum 5 points) Person
What is the name of this:
–	 ward If disorientation is suspected, patients should be asked 
–	 hospital their name and address. Ignorance of such basic details 
–	 district would indicate a relatively severe dementia or dis-
–	 town simulation, for whatever reason.
–	 country?

(Maximum 5 points) Attention and concentration
Registration
Name three objects. The patient’s behaviour during the interview will 

Award 1, 2 or 3 points according to how many the have shown whether he is easily distracted (by internal 
patient can repeat. or external stimuli) or have been paying attention to 

Resubmit list until patient is word perfect in order to use and concentrating on the questions you have asked. 
this for a later test of recall. Attention and concentration can be tested more 

Score only first attempt. formally by tasks which involve keeping track of 
(Maximum 3 points) familiar sequences of information and so do not 

Attention and calculation involve new learning. A basic test of attention and 
concentration is to ask the patient to repeat the days 

Have the patient subtract 7 from 100 and then subtract 7 of the week or months of the year backwards and 
from the result a total of five times; 1 point for each correct unobtrusively note how long it takes him. Another 
subtraction. useful test is to ask the patient to spell ‘world’ 

(Maximum 5 points) backwards: the impaired patient often transposes the 
Recall central letters of the word. Remember that literacy 
Ask for the three objects used in the registration test,  is implied in this test. Another test is to ask the 
1 point being awarded for each correct answer. patient to do serial sevens, for example ‘Starting at 

(Maximum 3 points) 100, take 7 away and keep taking 7 away for as long 
Language as you can’. If the patient finds this too difficult, you 

can do the same thing with serial threes starting 
1 point each for two objects correctly named (e.g. pencil at 20. Performance in these mathematical tasks is 
and watch) (2 points). more dependent on formal schooling than the first 

1 point for correct repetition of ‘No ifs, ands and buts’  tasks, so this must be borne in mind. Repeating a 
(1 point). sequence of digits (digit span) is also useful (see 

3 points if three-stage commands correctly obeyed: ‘Take memory testing below).
this piece of paper in your right hand, fold it in half and 
place it on the floor’ (3 points). Memory

1 point for correct response to a written command, such 
as ‘close your eyes’ (1 point). In order to remember anything it must be registered, 

Have the patient write a sentence. Award 1 point if the and this depends on attention and concentration. 
sentence is meaningful, has a verb and a subject (1 point). Where attention and concentration are very impaired, 

Test the patient’s ability to copy a complex diagram of the patient will not be able to attend to memory 
two intersecting pentagons (1 point). tests so it is probably pointless to proceed with them. 

(Total score 30) A basic subdivision of memory in clinical practice is 
into registration and immediate recall, short-term 
memory (about 5 minutes) and long-term memory 
(which encompasses recent memory going back a 

uncommon these days, especially in those with few days and remote memory of the more distant 
unstructured timetables. Long stays in hospital, where past and childhood).
one day is much like the next, however, are not In chronic organic brain disease, memory for recent 
conducive to an awareness of which particular day events is diminished, whereas early in the illness the 
it is or the exact date of the month. patient often remains able to remember events that 



SECTION Two
117

Psychiatric assessment ﻿
have happened in the past and can give a coherent it correctly, ask that it be remembered, since it will 
account of the family and early personal history. In be asked for again later. Continue with another part 
Korsakov’s psychosis due to thiamine deficiency, often of the interview and, after 2 minutes, ask the patient 
associated with heavy drinking, the patient may to repeat the information, record the response and 
confabulate, apparently recounting in great detail ask again after a further 3 minutes. Three or more 
things which never happened. Confabulation is not mistakes at 5 minutes indicate a short-term memory 
deliberate invention but consists of the inappropriate problem.
recall of recent or distant past experiences, illustrating 
a defect in the process of recall of memories. In the Testing longer term memory – recent
case of head injuries or in epileptic attacks, a detailed A useful approach is to ask the patient about recent 
attempt should be made to assess the presence of television programmes, such as the events in a popular 
retrograde (time from insult to return of memory) soap opera or the fortunes of a favourite football 
and anterograde (period prior to the insult in which team. Other recent events will include details about 
memory was absent) amnesia. the hospital itself and how the patient got there (the 

Memory impairment may be simulated for gain by interviewer needs to be able to corroborate the 
some manipulative patients (so-called ‘Ganser syn- answers). Current affairs should also be asked about, 
drome’), some of whom give approximate answers such as the names of top politicians and details of 
such as, to the question ‘what colour is grass?’ they any recent happenings of major importance. A less 
answer ‘green’, and to the question ‘how many legs direct approach is to ask the patient what has been 
has a cow?’ they answer ‘five’. Hysterical amnesia going on in the world or in this country recently, or 
may occur in dissociative states in which there is a (if there is a partner or friend present to corroborate) 
sudden total loss of memory. In contrast, in organic what they had for supper.
amnesia, even in dementing illnesses, long-term 
memory and personal identity are usually spared Testing longer term memory – remote
until the later stages of the disorder. Patients who Autobiographical memory (ask about past experi-
are depressed may appear to have memory impair- ences) is useful, but the interviewer needs to be able 
ment, depressive pseudodementia, which may only to corroborate the information (e.g. name of primary 
become recognised when the depression lifts and the and secondary schools, teachers’ names, date and 
memory improves. place of marriage). Another approach is to ask about 

general events (e.g. the dates of the First and Second 
Testing registration and immediate recall World Wars, the names of UK cities or capital cities). 
This can be tested using digit span. The interviewer This kind of information is general knowledge and 
asks the patient to repeat a series of digits immediately so will depend on education and intelligence as well 
after the interviewer has said them. They should be as memory.
said evenly about one per second with no particular The patient’s answers to all specific questions about 
grouping or emphasis. The patient then repeats the memory should be recorded. Where there is evidence 
whole series. Start with three digits and build up the of potentially significant memory impairment, the 
number of digits until the patient makes a mistake. patient often needs a formal assessment using detailed 
Note the maximum that can be repeated without a tests, often performed by a neuropsychologist.
mistake. This can be done repeating the digits back-
wards. An unimpaired person of average intelligence Intelligence
can repeat seven forward and five backward. Being 
able to repeat five or less forward suggests definite An assessment of the patient’s intelligence is one 
impairment. objective of the interview. Not only will this help to 

Another test of registration and immediate recall determine suitable treatment, it will also affect the 
is to read out a sentence and ask the patient to repeat interpretation of the MSE itself. In a patient with 
it immediately. Standardised sentences exist (e.g. the intelligence below the normal range, bizarre behaviour 
‘Stanford Binet sentences’). and abnormal ideas may occur as part of a normal 

fantasy life or as a result of stress or conflict and may 
not represent psychiatric illness. An approximate 

Testing short-term memory assessment of intelligence can be obtained from the 
A useful test of this is to give patients fictitious details educational and occupational history and from an 
to remember. Tell them that as a test of their memory, assessment of general knowledge. Alternatively, intel-
they will be given a person’s name, address and the ligence can be tested more formally, especially by 
name of a flower the person likes. Immediately after using the National Adult Reading Test (NART), as 
finishing, the patient is asked to repeat back the reading ability correlates closely with intelligence in 
information and their response is recorded. If the the absence of other disabilities (see below). If in 
patient makes a mistake, repeat the same information. doubt, inquire whether patients can read and write 
Keep going until it is repeated correctly, and record and see whether they can solve simple mathematical 
how many tries this takes. When the patient repeats problems, especially where these are related to daily 



118 8 Psychiatric assessment ﻿
activities such as shopping. Thus ‘what change would history taking was part of a helpful process, showing 
you get from a pound coin, if you bought something that you do understand his problems and out of 
that cost 35p?’. which useful interventions can arise.

Be clear about the management plan and give a 
Abstraction specific follow-up appointment or advise that no 
Tests of abstraction are rarely used in routine practice follow up is required, given your view of his state of 
but can be helpful in indicating patients who have health. It is important to avoid a situation where 
very concrete thinking as seen in organic impairment patients feel they have shared a lot of very private 
(particularly frontal lobe disorders). Responses can information but cannot see the reason for this and 
also elicit florid thought disorder indicating schizo- will not get anything out of it. A good interview will 
phrenia. A useful test is to give patients proverbs of act in the way of a detective explaining ‘who did it?’ 
increasing difficulty and ask what the meaning is, for to the assembled crowd in a standard detective story.
example ‘Too many cooks spoil the broth’. An 
appropriate answer would be something like ‘if too 
many people get involved in something it doesn’t go Final reflection
very well’ as compared to a concrete answer, for 
example ‘too much cooking gets you angry’. Record It can be very useful to spend a few moments thinking 
the answers. Again, intelligence level is important in about how the patient made you feel. This can tell 
such tests. you something about the patient as well as about 

yourself. This is part of a process called countertrans-
Insight ference. Countertransference is used in some forms 

of psychotherapy. Consider whether any difficulties 
This is an important section of the MSE since it the patient described to you may be due to the fact 
informs the decision of how to manage a patient. that they engender certain reactions in others. Like-
Insight refers primarily to a patient’s capacity to wise, your own feelings may be diagnostic, for example 
understand his problems and that they arise from a considerable sadness (and even at times tears in your 
mental illness. It also relates to his understanding of eyes) when assessing a depressed patient, or intrusive 
specific symptoms (e.g. realising that his ‘voices’ are anxiety when a very anxious patient outlines a stream 
not real) and to being willing to comply with treat- of troubling symptoms which make you think of lots 
ment such as medication. of physical diagnoses. By and large, however, the more 

There is a tendency for doctors to consider insight symptoms a patient presents, the more certain you 
as either present (the patient is aware of having a can be that it is not a specific organic illness.
mental illness) or absent (the patient has no awareness 
of illness). However, patients’ views are generally 
more nuanced, and their own understanding of an Further investigations
illness can give a much richer and more useful assess-
ment of insight. This will often involve an understand- Extended information gathering during further 
ing of the patient’s background culture and, for interviews, continuing assessment of the mental state, 
example, religious beliefs. Asking what patients think some laboratory investigations, psychological testing, 
can be done to help the problem will always assist brain imaging, social inquiry and occupational therapy 
in forming a management plan, and working with a assessment are all important.
partner or family (and their insight) will also be of 
benefit. Mental state evaluation

The evaluation of the mental state is a continuous 
Ending the interview process and should be carried out at each interview. 

The behaviour on admission wards of patients in 
Ending the interview properly is nearly as important hospital should always be regularly observed and 
as how it begins. Some minutes before the end, inform documented. Two or three days’ appropriate nursing 
patients that you are nearly finished and ask what observation, medical assessment and review can be 
else would they like to ask or talk about. Asking diagnostically as clarifying as a laparotomy for an 
patients what they think is wrong, for example, should unknown surgical condition. Observation includes 
help with clarifying insight. Let the patient know the way patients relate to other patients as well as 
that a report will be sent to the referring doctor and/ to staff and visitors, and whether there are any signs 
or the GP. of sleep or appetite disturbance or other abnormal 

Any psychiatric consultation should end with a behaviour (e.g. talking to themselves at night). 
clear outline to the patient about what you, the Questionnaires and structured interview schedules 
doctor, think is the problem and what should be done may also aid quantitative assessment of the mental 
in terms of treatment. This stage may need negotiation, state and evaluation of progress and response to 
and it is important to leave a patient feeling that the treatment.



SECTION Two
119

Psychiatric assessment ﻿

Neuropsychological testing from the deteriorating scores in dementing illness. 
Patients with schizophrenia, at least in the acute 

Psychological tests can be used quantitatively to assess stage, do not normally have cognitive decline, so if 
the patient’s cognitive state, behaviour, personality there is some clinical evidence of disturbed cognition 
and thinking process. Tests can be given to assess the then formal cognitive assessment may help to establish 
level of intelligence, either briefly with the Mill Hill whether a condition other than schizophrenia is 
test or Raven’s Progressive Matrices or in more detail present.
with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS). 
In behavioural disorders, it is useful to carry out a 
thorough behavioural analysis that must be designed Brain imaging
to be relevant to the individual problem. These Electroencephalography (EEG), computed tomogra-
investigations require the specialised skills of a clinical phy (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
psychologist. If there is a question of localised organic are sometimes appropriate when exploring the 
brain dysfunction, neuropsychology tests that aim to possibility of a demonstrable organic cause for 
explore specific cognitive processes or the functions behavioural signs and symptoms, such as epilepsy or 
of individual brain regions will be employed by the a space-occupying lesion. Indications for these 
clinical neuropsychologist. A detailed neuropsychologi- techniques include periodicity in the behavioural 
cal assessment may be indicated to establish the changes, the presence of an altered level of conscious-
presence of current cognitive functioning when ness or the finding of abnormalities on neurological 
cognitive decline is suspected. By comparing perfor- examination. In the absence of any of these and in 
mance against expected premorbid levels and against the presence of a typical psychiatric presentation, 
comparable population norms, the abnormality may the chances of finding any contributory structural 
be defined. Repeat testing after an interval of several brain anomalies are small. However, if a clinical 
months may help to clarify an unclear diagnosis or presentation is atypical, if the course of the illness 
support a more detailed prognosis when a diagnosis does not proceed as expected or if a diagnosis of 
of dementia has been reached. Repeat testing may dementia is questioned, then structural brain imaging 
also help to distinguish the relatively static cognitive may be helpful. In the future, however, functional 
deficits arising from chronic depression in the elderly brain imaging may increasingly be of diagnostic value.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Patients presenting 
as emergencies 9 

Geraint Morris

Introduction This chapter deals with conditions requiring assess-
ment and management within the first hour and 

A medical emergency requires swift recognition and focuses on the presenting complaint. Recognising the 
prompt action. Recognition of urgency does not nature of an emergency presentation begins with 
necessarily require a precise diagnosis; the fact that how the patient comes to medical attention. This 
the patient is dangerously unwell is usually obvious may be from information provided by the patient 
due to an abnormality revealed by the internationally himself or witnesses such as paramedical (e.g. ambu-
recognized assessment system for critically ill people lance) staff, friends, family or concerned members of 
of Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability and the public. The clinician will make an initial assessment 
Exposure of the patient (ABCD and E). When an by simply observing the patient; no apparent signs 
abnormality is found it should be acted upon and of life should initiate a life support response. If the 
followed by a reassessment to establish if the interven- patient is alive, then the general impression of how 
tion was useful. The clinician simultaneously needs sick a patient appears is a reasonably accurate judge-
to make a decision during this time as when to ment of urgency. The experienced clinician will make 
summon help if available. these decisions in seconds. A particular clue will 

be in the respiratory rate and effort. An increased 
respiratory rate and work of breathing are the first 
physiological parameters to be altered in the shocked 

The importance of clinical assessment state and are often the subtle clues that alert a clinician 
to an unwell patient even from the end of the bed. 

High-quality history taking and clinical examination Observing and recording this parameter for all patients 
will usually identify a diagnosis in a timely fashion is a fundamental part of developing a sound clinical 
and enable the initiation of appropriate investigation method in emergency situations.
and management plans. In modern medicine, much Urgency of response is dependant upon responses 
has been made of the awareness of ‘vital observations’ to assessment of the ABCD and E system of assess-
or ‘vital signs’, which are often recorded by nursing ment. A talking patient has a patent airway, can 
staff and are usually available prior to a doctor’s maintain sufficient respiratory effort to make the 
clinical assessment. It should be remembered that vocal cords vibrate and move enough air to allow gas 
observations support clinical diagnosis and manage- exchange. Similarly, if the patient is talking he must 
ment and do not replace them. be perfusing his brain with sufficient oxygen to 

The relationship between good history taking, sound undertake the processes of speech as well as being 
examination skills and the ordering of appropriate responsive enough to do so. The clinician therefore 
investigations is as important in an emergency situation has a degree of time with which to make further 
as in any other clinical setting. Many could try to assessments and management decisions in this 
argue that with the advancement of science, history situation.
taking and clinical examination should be superseded It should be stressed that the aim of this chapter 
by simple awareness of available investigations. A is to help the reader develop a logical method for 
poorly taken and rushed history, followed by numerous the clinical assessment of the acutely presenting 
irrelevant investigations, is poor-quality medicine. patient. Although the topics covered here relate to 
Such an approach often leads to a wrong or missed common acute presentations, greater detail relevant 
diagnosis and some abnormal results of uncertain to these presentations has not been provided, as much 
significance. Investigations are not always risk free, of this will be dealt with elsewhere in this book. It 
and patients should not be exposed unnecessarily to is also hoped that the reader will not look on this 
interventions such as ionizing radiation without serious chapter as an amalgamation of lists but rather as an 
thought. approach to logical thinking.



122 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Diagnosis versus resuscitation is evidence of sepsis with additional physiological 
upset, such as new or increased requirement for 

Sometimes, the severity of illness dictates that life- oxygen, hypotension, acute oliguria, delayed capillary 
saving resuscitative treatment should begin before refill or mottling or deranged laboratory values (e.g. 
any diagnosis is reached, especially in acutely ill raised serum creatinine, coagulation abnormalities, 
patients with problems such as shock or breathlessness. raised serum lactate, thrombocytopenia, raised bili-
However, it should be possible to make an underlying rubin). Severe sepsis leading to shock (‘septic shock’) 
diagnosis (or a differential diagnosis) in the majority is discussed below.
of cases, and an acutely ill patient may not clinically The history will often suggest the source of sepsis 
improve until the treatment based on the correct (cough, abdominal pain, dysuria, headache). Other 
diagnosis is provided. Acute resuscitation and the important features include details of any recent travel 
formulation of diagnoses will often be performed (country and duration of residence), a drug and 
successfully in tandem. lifestyle history (including any recreational drug use), 

weight loss, chronic illness and any risk factors 
for immunosuppression such as recent chemo-

The pyrexial and septic patient therapy, steroid therapy and the possibility of HIV 
infection.

Patients frequently present to emergency departments The examination should initially focus on critical 
with signs and symptoms of infection, as do existing issues that need immediate action. If the patient has 
inpatients, irrespective of the cause for initial hospital a raised pulse or heart rate, respiratory rate, prolonged 
admission. Severe infections have the potential for capillary refill, hypoxia or hypotension, oxygen, fluids 
significant morbidity and mortality, and it is vital that and appropriate antibiotics should be administered 
they are identified and diagnosed promptly. Although urgently before embarking on a detailed examination. 
the majority of patients presenting with fever will In searching for a source, look for exudate or pus at 
have an infective cause that can be easily elicited the back of the throat. Lung auscultation may reveal 
from the history and examination, it is also well features of acute bronchitis (wheeze) or consolidation. 
recognized that there are many non-infective inflam- Heart murmurs in the presence of fever may indicate 
matory causes (Table 9.1). infective endocarditis. The abdominal examination 

The concept of ‘systemic inflammatory response should identify any tenderness (e.g. right upper 
syndrome’ (SIRS) is widely recognized, in which an quadrant in cholecystitis, loin in pyelonephritis). If 
acute-phase response (such as pyrexia or hypothermia, a patient has obvious cellulitis, look carefully for skin 
tachypnoea, tachycardia, leucopenia or leucocytosis) bites, lacerations or tinea pedis as a possible route 
indicates underlying inflammation. If these features of entry. If the patient complains of headache, look 
are present in the face of infection, the term ‘sepsis’ for features of meningism. Lymphadenopathy and 
is often used. The term ‘severe sepsis’ is used if there superficial or skin abscesses should be noted.

Immediate investigations may include those which 
lend support to an inflammatory process (white cell 

Table 9.1  Logical thinking for patients presenting  count, C-reactive protein), severity of infection (blood 
with fever cultures), consequences such as dehydration (urea 

and electrolytes), underlying predisposition (blood 
Mechanism Common or important examples sugar) and source (urinalysis, urine culture, blood 
Infection Viral (upper respiratory, lower culture, chest X-ray). In response to the history and 

respiratory, infectious mononucleosis, examination, one may proceed to throat swab, blood 
hepatitis A); bacterial (less common films for malaria, faeces analysis (toxin or culture), 
causes include infective endocarditis, lumbar puncture, transthoracic echocardiogram or 
meningitis, tuberculosis, spontaneous abdominal imaging (ultrasound or CT scan).
bacterial peritonitis, pleural empyema, 
cholangitis); parasitic (malaria, 
schistosomiasis); fungal The patient with chest pain

Systemic Rheumatoid arthritis; systemic lupus 
inflammation erythematosus (SLE); polymyalgia Although the majority of patients who present to 

rheumatica; Wegener’s the emergency unit with chest pain will not have 
granulomatosis; inflammatory bowel clinically significant coronary artery disease, it is this 
disease; malignant neuroleptic potential diagnosis that often dominates the initial 
syndrome; blood transfusion reaction thoughts of the assessing doctor. This is why patients 

with chest pain who appear unwell or in need of 
Malignancy and Solid tumours; lymphoma; leukaemia; immediate resuscitation should have an ECG recorded 
granulomatous amyloidosis; sarcoidosis before the initial history and examination are com-
disease plete. The outcome from attempts to open an occluded 
Drugs Prescription; recreational (e.g. ecstasy) coronary artery depends on the speed with which 



SECTION Two
123

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.2  Logical thinking for patients presenting with chest pain
Potentially life-threatening conditions Other causes of 
– all usually causing central chest pain central chest pain Causes of pleuritic chest pain
Coronary artery disease (myocardial Pericarditis Pericarditis
infarction or acute coronary syndrome) Gastro-oesophageal PE (more likely to be smaller and more peripheral)
Massive pulmonary embolus (PE) reflux disease (GORD) Pneumothorax
Thoracic aortic dissection: severe, tearing Muscular or skeletal Pneumonia (reactive pleuritis)
in nature, radiating to interscapular area Anxiety Empyema
Pneumothorax (particularly tension) Viral pleuritis
Oesophageal rupture Malignant involvement of chest wall (including 

mesothelioma)
Rib trauma, fracture or metastases
Inflammatory pleuritis (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus)

arrangements can be made for either thrombolysis 
or angioplasty, so there is little to be gained (and Table 9.3  Modified Wells criteria for assessing the risk of 
much to be lost) from a prolonged assessment. In pulmonary embolism (PE) in a patient with symptoms 
many countries, paramedical staff are trained to consistent with pulmonary embolism
recognize acute myocardial infarction on an ECG Clinical parameter Score
and take patients direct to the nearest centre that Clinical evidence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 3
provides round-the-clock acute angioplasty services. 
However, such facilities are not universally available No alternative diagnosis likely other than PE 3
and in some patients with critical coronary artery Heart rate greater than 100 per minute 1.5
disease the initial ECG recording may be normal, so Surgery or immobility in preceding 4 weeks 1.5
it is essential that a careful history and examination Previous confirmed DVT or PE 1.5
are performed on all patients with chest pain not Haemoptysis 1
obviously in immediate need of resuscitation or Active malignancy 1
intervention. Patients with chest pain are, understand-
ably, often anxious about the possibility of underlying Total score Risk
serious heart disease and an important part of the >6 High
doctor’s role is to project calm reassurance. 2-6 Moderate

Chest pain that has a life-threatening cause (Table <2 Low
9.2) is usually central and of sudden/rapid onset. 
Certain features may be diagnostically helpful; these 
include radiation of the pain to the left arm and/or Box 9.1  Risk factors for coronary heart disease
jaw (myocardial ischaemia) or the interscapular area 
(aortic dissection); accompanying breathlessness ■	 Age
(massive pulmonary embolus or pneumothorax); or ■	 Blood pressure
a clear temporal association with prolonged vomiting ■	 Smoking
(oesophageal rupture). In pericarditis, the pain may ■	 Cholesterol
be ‘classic’ (central pain relieved by sitting forward) ■	 Diabetes
or pleuritic. The features of chest infections and viral ■	 Racial grouping
infections should be obvious. Pneumonias are not ■	 Family history of coronary artery disease or stroke before 
infrequently associated with headache. Important the age of 60
examination features to note during the initial, rapid ■	 Girth (obesity)
assessment of an ill patient with chest pain include 
the fine crepitations of pulmonary oedema, the 
hyperresonant percussion and tracheal deviation of Table 9.3). The blood pressure should be taken in 
pneumothorax and the asymmetric blood pressure both arms, particularly if the arm pulses are unequal. 
readings consistent with thoracic aortic dissection. Unequal blood pressure measurements in the arms 

If ‘ABC’ interventions are not required for resuscita- raises the possibility of aortic dissection and serious 
tion, if the patient is stable and there are no other consideration should be given to appropriate urgent 
features requiring immediate action (e.g. peripheral imaging (usually thoracic CT scanning). A raised 
cyanosis), a more considered assessment is appropriate. jugular venous pressure may suggest early heart failure. 
In addition to the history, the risk factors for coronary Precordial auscultation may reveal a pericardial rub. 
artery disease and pulmonary embolism (PE) may There may be classical signs of pneumonia. It can 
be factored into the diagnostic process (Box 9.1 and be difficult to differentiate between pleuritic and 



124 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
musculoskeletal chest pain from the history, but pain Table 9.4  Potentially life-threatening conditions presenting 
exacerbated by palpation and posture changes more as breathlessness
than by inspiration is more likely to be musculoskeletal. 
Signs of deep venous thrombosis automatically raise Potentially life-threatening 
the clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism. Clinical assessment conditions

The serious nature of many of the diagnoses that Stridor (may be Partial obstruction of 
present with chest pain dictates that the threshold mistaken for wheeze) trachea or major airway
for certain investigations is often low. In addition to Audible wheeze (one Severe asthma
being a crucial test at the moment of initial assessment, should listen very Anaphylaxis
the ECG has additional value when it is repeated carefully, as it may be Acute bronchitis
over a period of time, looking for any evolution in very quiet) Pulmonary oedema
its appearance (often called ‘dynamic changes’). 
Detailed description and explanations of the possible Diffuse features Pneumonitis

ECG features of myocardial infarction and pulmonary Widespread pneumonia

embolism are given elsewhere. The chest X-ray may Pulmonary oedema

show features of pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum Significant asymmetry Pneumothorax
(from oesophageal rupture), heart failure, widened of findings in a whole Massive pleural effusion
mediastinum (often seen in thoracic aortic dissection), lung on percussion and/ Total lung collapse
pneumonia, rib fractures/destruction and pleural or auscultation
effusions. In the emergency unit, measurement of Focal features of Lobar collapse from tumour, 
troponin in blood (a protein released when cardiac consolidation foreign body or mucus plug
myocytes undergo ischaemic necrosis) is performed Pneumonia
on many patients with chest pain. It is not a diagnostic No obvious abnormality Pulmonary embolism 
test of cardiac chest pain, but ‘negative’ results (below (hypoxia often present)
a certain threshold) indicate that the risk of a serious Metabolic acidosis (hypoxia 
acute cardiac event in the ensuing 30 days is extremely often absent)
low. A negative troponin test does not obviate the 
need to make a detailed clinical assessment; a patient 
with a typical history of ‘crescendo angina’ (worsening 
in severity and/or frequency, occurring at rest or on General principles
minimal exertion over days to weeks) should still be 
treated as an emergency even if the troponin result A rapid clinical assessment will establish if detailed 
is reassuring. history taking is going to be realistic. A conscious, 

alert patient who is able to speak in full sentences is 
reassuring. Features suggestive of an obstructed airway 

The breathless patient include complete absence of airway sounds (complete 
obstruction) or added sounds of laboured breathing 

When life-threatening conditions present with breath- where air entry is diminished (partial obstruction). 
lessness, it should be rapidly established whether Tachycardia and tachypnoea may reflect respiratory 
immediate and resuscitative interventions are required distress. Use of accessory muscles of respiration is 
whilst simultaneously making a clinical assessment to typical in the partially obstructed airway, and signs 
establish the cause (Table 9.4). The patient should be include a tracheal tug (a slight downward movement 
placed in a safe, monitored (ECG and pulse oximetry) of the trachea with each inspiratory effort), paradoxical 
environment and clinicians should act quickly if chest and abdominal movement (‘see-sawing’ – the 
there is evidence of visible distress, the usage of chest wall moves inwards during inspiration and 
accessory muscles of respiration, high respiratory rate, outwards in expiration and there is dyssynchrony 
high pulse rate, cyanosis or observable low oxygen between rib cage and abdomen), with supraclavicular 
saturations. The immediate response should be to and intercostal ‘in-drawing’. Irritability, agitation and 
administer high-flow oxygen to the patient with any reduced consciousness level may reflect hypoxaemia 
of the above findings, unless there is good evidence and carbon dioxide retention. Do not rely on cyanosis 
that this has on this occasion, or previous occa- as a feature in identifying an obstructed airway as 
sions, caused breathing difficulties (most commonly this is a very late preterminal sign. Observe or ask 
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, about ‘best breathing position’. Be aware that the 
COPD). In the majority of cases, arrangements for patient may have positioned himself for optimal 
urgent ECG and chest X-ray (CXR) will be made airflow in the setting of airway obstruction; moving 
immediately, before the initial clinical assessment is the patient into a supine position may precipitate 
complete. There may even be certain clinical scenarios loss of the airway altogether. Low pulse oximetry 
(e.g. upper airway obstruction, tension pneumo- readings (SpO2) reflect inadequacy of oxygenation, 
thorax) in which immediate clinical intervention although it is important to remember that pulse 
is necessary. oximetry provides a measure of oxygenation and is 



SECTION Two
125

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.5  Logical thinking for conditions causing breathlessness, including the emergency conditions
Clinical assessment Classification Condition
Stridor Large airway disease Partial obstruction of trachea or major airway
Bilateral or diffuse wheeze Small airway Asthma

disease Acute bronchitis (including bronchitic component to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
Anaphylaxis
Pulmonary oedema (presenting as bronchial oedema)
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (though often the 
wheeze from obesity-related airflow limitation is not 
heard)

Asymmetric features in whole lung field Pleural disease Pneumothorax
(tracheal deviation, hyper-resonance to 
percussion and diminished breath sounds)
Asymmetric features in whole lung field Pleural disease Massive pleural effusion
(tracheal deviation, stony dullness to 
percussion and diminished breath sounds)
Asymmetric features in whole lung field Large airway disease Total lung collapse (tumour, foreign body, mucus 
(tracheal deviation, dullness to percussion plug)
and diminished breath sounds)
Diffuse bilateral abnormalities Diffuse parenchymal Pneumonitis
(crepitations) disease Pulmonary oedema

Pulmonary fibrosis
Diffuse bilateral abnormalities (bronchial Diffuse parenchymal Multilobar or bronchopneumonia
breathing) disease
Focal abnormality (bronchial breathing) Focal parenchymal Pneumonia

disease Lobar collapse
Bronchiectasis

Focal abnormality (dullness to percussion Pleural disease Pleural effusion
and diminished breath sounds)
Bilateral, focal abnormalities (basal stony Pleural disease Bilateral pleural effusions
dullness and diminished breath sounds)
Bilateral, focal abnormalities (bronchial Parenchymal disease Bilateral pneumonia (e.g. bibasal pneumonia)
breath sounds)
Thoracic deformity Chest wall skeletal Scoliosis

disease Thoracic surgery
No obvious abnormality Pulmonary vascular Pulmonary embolism

disease Pulmonary hypertension
Respiratory muscle Diaphragm paralysis
weakness Neuromuscular disease
Compensatory effort Metabolic acidosis

Anaemia
Psychogenic Psychogenic hyperventilation

This table is not intended to be an exhaustive list. It is aimed at assisting logical thought, particularly with regard to clinical features.

not the same as ventilation. Arterial blood gas sampling promise the airway, such as facial burns, bleeding and 
may be helpful but should not delay management. foreign bodies obstructing the airway. Always provide 
Respiratory acidosis, with a high carbon dioxide high flow oxygen with a reservoir bag at 15 litres/
tension (PaCO2) and reduced pH, reflects alveolar minute, and reassess frequently, looking for signs of 
hypoventilation. When assessing patients, look care- deterioration.
fully for these signs and symptoms and always call In the emergency situation of the acutely breathless 
for help early from an anaesthetist if airway com- patient it is helpful to consider the potential problem 
promise is suspected. The young can compensate in one of two ‘groupings’: upper airway obstruction 
well initially, masking impending desaturation and and cardiopulmonary pathologies that affect ventila-
hypoxaemia. Be mindful of injuries that will com- tion and/or gas exchange (Table 9.5).



126 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Airway obstruction led to a sharp reduction in the incidence of acute 
epiglottitis – an important cause of stridor in children 

Most commonly, airway obstruction occurs in a patient in which infection by this organism of the valve at 
with a decreased level of consciousness with resultant the tracheo-oesophageal junction causes fever, dys-
loss of the cough reflex used to clear normal bronchial phagia, sore throat and (classically) drooling of saliva 
secretions. Such patients are also at risk of aspiration as the pain of swallowing dictates that the child will 
of gastric contents because of depression of other try to avoid doing this. If stridor as opposed to wheeze 
reflexes that control the competence of the tracheo- is considered, the cause may be evident from the 
oesophageal junction. Pragmatically, this can be easily history (airway cancer, foreign body exposure or 
inferred by the patient’s response to insertion of an anaphylaxis). The examiner’s ear should be placed 
adjunct such as an oropharyngeal (Guedel) airway. carefully close to the mouth of the patient to try to 
Fully conscious patients, in whom laryngeal reflexes establish the source of airflow limitation. Stridor of 
are present, will not tolerate this airway and inserting any cause in any age group is frightening to patients; 
one may precipitate gagging, vomiting and laryngo- the attending doctor’s demeanor needs to be calm 
spasm. In a patient with reduced consciousness and and gentle whilst simultaneously arranging emergency 
a threatened airway, the adjunct is tolerated, with assistance from colleagues (e.g. ENT and/or anaes-
consequent relief of backward tongue displacement thesia) to establish a secure airway. Acute stridor is 
and soft palate obstruction. Insertion of a Guedel an airway emergency, and the teams of intensive care 
airway should usually be combined with manoeuvring and ear, nose and throat specialists should be mobilized 
the patient into the recovery (lateral) position as quickly as possible.
(the effect of which is to push the tongue and jaw Specific mention should be made of burn victims 
forward under gravity, thereby improving the airway) in whom inhalation of superheated gases and toxins 
(Fig. 9.1). of combustion causes swelling of the lining of the 

The second, less common scenario of airway obstruc- tracheobronchial tree with consequent obstruction. 
tion is the patient presenting with stridor – the term The history will usually be obvious, but important 
used to describe the harsh high-pitched musical clinical signs that suggest airway injury include a 
breathing noise caused by narrowing of the upper hoarse voice, singed hairs of the nasal passages and 
airways with impending complete obstruction. It may soot and erythema in the upper airway. Recognising 
be inspiratory, expiratory or biphasic, although it is this promptly should initiate measures to secure the 
most commonly heard just during inspiration. airway early with an endotracheal tube. The stridor 
Inspiratory stridor indicates laryngeal obstruction, associated with the severe upper airway oedema of 
since the negative intrathoracic pressures exacerbate anaphylaxis will be dealt with later in this chapter.
extrathoracic obstruction during inspiration. Intratho- The importance of recognizing airway obstruction 
racic obstruction may cause expiratory stridor, as the as the cause of acute breathlessness is self-evident; 
airways are compressed during expiration. Common although provision of supplemental oxygen is a crucial 
causes of stridor include tumours (usually laryngeal/ therapeutic intervention, it will not resolve the 
tracheal but also mediastinal and oesophageal), underlying problem of hypercapnia associated with 
peritonsillar and retropharyngeal abscesses, inhalation hypoventilation.
of a foreign body and laryngotracheobronchitis 
(‘croup’). Children are more susceptible to the latter Acute breathlessness due to ventilatory 
two causes due to the narrower diameter of their 
airway and the fact that normal inquisitive behaviour and/or oxygenation defects
often leads to objects being inserted into their mouths. The sensation of breathlessness is poorly understood. 
In developed countries, vaccination programmes that In normal respiration active inspiration is followed 
include Haemophilus influenzae type B vaccine have by passive expiration, but in breathlessness of any 

Figure 9.1  The recovery position. 



SECTION Two
127

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
cause there is active expiration and a change in the Focal features such as tactile fremitus, dullness to 
normal inspiration:expiration time ratio. The dia- percussion, increased vocal resonance and bronchial 
phragm works at a mechanical disadvantage when breathing provide evidence of consolidation and/or 
this ratio changes and hypoxia added to this situation collapse and can usually be confirmed by an urgent 
may contribute further to the discomfort of breathless- chest X-ray.
ness. The usual cause is of loss of lung compliance/ It may be impossible to differentiate between the 
elastic recoil which requires active expiration to wheeze of severe asthma, anaphylaxis and acute 
compensate. This is seen either with chronic damage bronchitis. One should try to establish a history of 
to lung parenchyma or acutely when the alveolar asthma or exposure to potential allergens. There may 
spaces are filled with material which is less compress- be historical features of infection. Examination may 
ible than aerated lung such as interstitial fluid, pus identify other features of anaphylaxis, such as swollen 
or blood. In some conditions (classically acute asthma) facial tissue (orbital areas, lips, tongue). The wheeze 
severe overinflation of the lungs reduces their ability of pulmonary oedema occurs when there is compres-
to expire effectively. Finally the sensation of breathless- sion of the major bronchi by oedematous parenchyma 
ness may occur with conditions completely unrelated (when diffuse features are heard in addition to 
to the heart or lungs, such as diabetic ketoacidosis. wheeze) or when there is predominant bronchial 
Here, a change in blood pH is sensed by chemo- oedema (when the diffuse auscultatory features may 
receptors in the brainstem leading to Kussmaul’s not be heard). The patient with pulmonary oedema 
breathing (‘air hunger’) as an attempt is made to manifesting as wheeze may share other clinical features 
hyperventilate and blow off carbon dioxide, thereby seen in ‘classical’ pulmonary oedema.
improving the acidosis. If there are no obvious examination abnormalities 

History taking is often limited in breathless patients. in the acutely breathless patient, then the history 
Accompanying friends, relatives or carers may be will need further clarification. Chest pain and/or 
able to provide collateral information and it may be breathlessness in the presence of relevant risk factors 
possible to elicit certain key features by asking simple raise the possibility of pulmonary embolism (PE) 
‘yes/no’ questions (‘Do you have asthma? Have you (Table 9.3). Investigation with an arterial blood gas 
eaten something you are allergic to?). It may be is useful in determining oxygen and carbon dioxide 
impossible to differentiate between the wheeze of exchange alongside any disturbances in pH. Most 
acute asthma, anaphylaxis, bronchitis or, rarely, conditions causing breathlessness are exacerbated by 
pulmonary oedema, but a history of previous asthma lying flat and relieved by sitting up, though this 
and atopy, fever or chest pain may help direct the ‘orthopnoea’ is most obvious with pulmonary oedema 
clinician to a working diagnosis. If asthma is suspected, and respiratory muscle weakness. Breathlessness 
then early administration of a beta-2-adrenergic relieved by lying flat (platypnoea) is relatively rare 
agonist can be lifesaving and will rarely cause harm. and is most often associated with PE; in this case, 
The ability to administer this medication either via the supine posture improves pulmonary perfusion 
nebulizer or metered dose inhaler and spacer device and provides relief. A cough acutely productive of 
is a fundamental skill that should be familiar to all purulent sputum may support a working diagnosis 
clinicians. If it is ineffective due to severe broncho- of pneumonia. Longer-standing cough may be associ-
constriction, then intravenous administration can be ated with non-purulent sputum production (asthma, 
considered by experienced clinicians. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and bronchi-

Clinical examination of the breathless patient may ectasis) or non-production (interstitial lung disease 
reveal significant asymmetry in chest expansion, and lung cancer). An absent or weak cough may 
percussion and/or auscultation. In general, the side suggest respiratory muscle disease. Acute, frothy 
that moves less has the pathology within it. The sputum (occasionally tinged with blood) may be seen 
deviated trachea will be ipsilateral to the side of lung in pulmonary oedema. Frank haemoptysis may occur 
collapse or focal fibrosis and contralateral to a tension in PE, lung cancer, pulmonary vasculitis, pneumonia, 
pneumothorax or very large pleural effusion. These tuberculosis and acute bronchitis.
are differentiated by the percussion note which will 
be hyper-resonant in tension pneumothorax and dull 
(some say ‘stony dull’) in the presence a massive The patient with hypotension or shock
effusion. Breath sounds may be absent or poorly 
heard in the affected lung in all of these conditions. There are numerous definitions for ‘shock’ but a 
Relief may be immediate with minimal aspiration of useful one may be considered to be ‘a failure of blood 
either air (tension pneumothorax) or fluid (pleural flow to provide sufficient perfusion of the major 
effusion) prior to formal drainage. organs’. It is often associated with hypotension. 

Diffuse polyphonic wheeze or indistinct widespread Hypotension and shock are clinical emergencies and 
coarse crackles with acute on chronic shortness require appropriate and immediate intervention. 
of breath is typical of an exacerbation of COPD. Hypotension may be defined as ‘abnormally low 
Widespread bilateral unchanging fine crepitations are blood pressure for that given patient’, which means 
most often heard with acute pulmonary oedema. interpreting the documented blood pressure in 



128 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
context. For one patient, a ‘normal’ recorded blood cooler peripheries, with weak, ‘thready’ peripheral 
pressure may be significantly lower compared to pulses. Although ‘normal’ pulse pressure is often 
previous readings. In another, a ‘low’ blood pressure quoted as 40 mmHg, it should be noted that during 
may be entirely normal for that specific patient. If hypotension this figure should be interpreted with 
in doubt, a low blood pressure should always be acted caution. For example, a blood pressure of 75/40 mmHg 
upon. For the purposes of this chapter, it will be could be interpreted as having a widened pulse pres-
accepted that hypotension and shock encompass sure of 35 mmHg, as this is in the context of a low 
similar pathologies and belong on the same spectrum. systolic blood pressure.
Severe hypotension may lead to shock. It is essential, There are varying types of shock, which need general 
therefore, that, irrespective of aetiology, this is seen discrimination to apply definitive treatment (Box 
as a medical emergency, and a joint effort is made 9.2). One type of shock may evolve into another, 
simultaneously to initiate resuscitative treatment and leading to a mixed clinical picture requiring more 
make a diagnosis. This involves administering intra- than one treatment strategy. For example, it is not 
venous fluids while other clinical features and vital uncommon for septic shock (ordinarily presenting 
observations are elicited. The fluids may be subse- with a widened pulse pressure) to lead rapidly to 
quently stopped if pulmonary oedema becomes cardiogenic shock (usually characterized by a narrow 
evident. The organ that is most sensitive under perfu- pulse pressure) in patients with coexisting heart 
sion is the brain; confusion and decreased levels of disease. Septic shock is also often associated with 
consciousness in the context of shock indicate poor hypovolaemic shock. It is not uncommon for cardio-
oxygenation, so patients should usually be nursed genic shock to improve with treatment but then be 
lying flat to promote cerebral perfusion. superseded by infection and septic shock. If it is not 

Teamwork is paramount. If more than one clinician possible to categorize a pulse pressure into narrow 
is available, one may focus on taking a history while or wide, other features described below may help 
another may take responsibility for examination and identify the cause of shock.
institution of treatment. Examination findings, irre- Narrow pulse pressure associated with shock is 
spective of the cause, may include a rapid pulse and almost always a consequence of cardiac failure 
heart rate and a third heart sound. It should be noted (‘cardiogenic shock’) or hypovolaemia (‘hypovolaemic 
that in otherwise fit individuals, in the face of severe shock’). Examination findings, in addition to specific 
hypovolaemia, there may be a prolonged period of features described below, may include cold and pale 
‘compensation’, in which the healthy heart maintains limb peripheries. Although there are many general 
cardiac output and a normal blood pressure by causes of widened pulse pressure (including aortic 
increasing the heart rate and the force of contraction. regurgitation, thyrotoxicosis, fever, anaemia, pregnancy, 
Therefore, the patient with unexplained tachycardia patent ductus arteriosus, aortic dissection, raised 
should be examined and investigated thoroughly, and intracranial pressure, vasodilating drugs, Beriberi heart 
impending shock should not be missed. disease and old age), wide pulse pressure with shock 

During resuscitation, a quick starting point is needed is almost always a consequence of profound vasodilata-
when assessing the causes of shock, as a correct tion, usually with warm limb peripheries. The most 
diagnosis will dictate the most appropriate interven- common cause is infection (‘septic shock’); less 
tion. One way to categorize shock is to differentiate common causes include anaphylaxis (‘anaphylactic 
causes into those with a wide or a narrow pulse shock’) and loss of neurogenic vasomotor tone 
pressure (‘pulse pressure’ is the difference between (‘neurogenic shock’).
systolic and diastolic blood pressure) (Table 9.6). As 
a general rule, patients with widened pulse pressure 
will present with warmer peripheries, and the palpable Hypovolaemic shock
peripheral pulse may be more ‘bounding’ in nature. Conceptually, this is the easiest to understand as 
Patients with narrowed pulse pressure often have simply insufficient circulating volume to provide for 

the oxygen demands of the organs. Typically, this is 
due to haemorrhage and may be divided into four 
classes (Table 9.7). External haemorrhage is usually 

Table 9.6  Logical thinking in shock clinically obvious, either from the history or from 
Mechanism Common or important examples visual evidence of blood loss. The source of internal 
Narrow pulse Hypovolaemic shock (haemorrhage, bleeding may be more difficult to diagnose, although 
pressure fluid losses from enteral tract, fluid 

losses from renal tract, fluid losses Box 9.2  Types of shock
from skin (burns)); cardiogenic shock 
from myocardial failure (coronary Hypovolaemic
ischaemia, acute myocarditis) Cardiogenic

Widened pulse Septic shock; anaphylactic shock; Distributive
pressure neurogenic shock Obstructive



SECTION Two
129

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.7  Classes of haemorrhage
Class I Class II Class III Class IV

Blood loss (ml) Up to 750 750-1500 1500-2000 >2000
Blood loss Up to 15% 15%-30% 30%-40% >40%
(% Blood volume)
Pulse rate <100 >100 >120 >140
Blood pressure Normal Normal Decreased Decreased
Pulse pressure (mmHg) Normal or increased Decreased Decreased Decreased
Respiratory rate 14-20 20-30 30-40 >35
Urine output (ml/hr) >30 20-30 5-15 Negligible
CNS/Mental status Slightly anxious Mildly anxious Anxious, confused Confused, lethargic

Table 9.8  Internal bleeding sites intra-abdominal blood loss, so a carefully taken history 
is likely to be diagnostically informative. Replacement 

Pelvis Pelvic fracture of fluid with crystalloid in the first instance is the 
Ectopic pregnancy most important intervention.

Abdomen Liver
Spleen Cardiogenic shock
Kidney

Thorax Massive haemothorax Cardiogenic shock refers to a failure of the heart to 
pump blood effectively to meet peripheral oxygen 

Gastrointestinal Oesophageal and/or gastric varices demands. It is most frequently due to a large myo-
Duodenal ulcer cardial infarction but may also be due to cardiac 

Retroperitoneal Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm dysrhythmias, other causes of cardiac muscle pump 
Peripheries Long bone fractures failure (e.g. myocarditis, cardiomyopathy) or acute 

cardiac valve problems. In this situation, as with 
hypovolaemic shock, there will usually be a narrow 
pulse pressure. Cardiogenic shock may be associated 

the prevailing clinical picture is common to both with a preceding history of chest pain, palpitations 
(Table 9.8). Cool peripheries and corresponding or breathlessness (in particular orthopnoea). There 
changes in heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory are frequently auscultatory features of pulmonary 
rate are key indicators. Simple assessment through oedema. Patients with brittle cardiac function may 
testing the capillary refill time and provocative testing present with cardiogenic shock irrespective of the 
such as a postural blood pressure is useful in unmask- initial trigger. An ECG is often informative and may 
ing compensated shock. In the initial period following show changes of recent infarction, dysrhythmia and 
a haemorrhage, it should be remembered that the nonspecific changes of pericarditis, myocarditis and 
blood haemoglobin concentration may be preserved. cardiomyopathy. Treatment will largely depend on 
Once bleeding is suspected as the cause of hypovol- the cause; inotropic support and invasive measures 
aemic shock, the clinical approach is straightforward are frequently required.
and intuitive; replace the blood that has been lost 
(as it is the best resuscitative fluid) and stop the 
bleeding. External bleeding can be controlled in most Distributive shock
situations by locally applied pressure. Internal bleeding Distributive shock is due to inappropriate distribution 
often necessitates surgical intervention, although of a normal or elevated cardiac output. Invariably 
interventional radiology techniques are increasingly there is profound vasodilatation with associated 
being applied in a number of situations and specialist capillary leakage. The most common cause is severe 
institutions. sepsis, in which an overwhelming cascade of inflam-

Although external and internal bleeding are the matory mediators causes distribution of blood to 
most common causes of hypovolaemic shock, non- inappropriate areas. The clinical history may suggest 
haemorrhagic causes also exist. In developing countries an obvious source of infection and examination 
gastrointestinal fluid loss (e.g. due to cholera) is a findings may include a fever, observed rigors, ausculta-
leading cause of death, especially in children. Other tory features of lung consolidation or abdominal 
volume-losing conditions include salt-wasting renal features of peritonitis.
conditions, burns, sequestration of fluid into the bowel Anaphylactic shock is usually clinically easily 
and adrenal failure (Addison’s disease). As a rule, apparent (respiratory distress, agitation, urticarial 
hypovolaemic shock in the context of these conditions rash, face, mouth, tongue and orbital swelling and 
takes longer to develop than, for example, acute wheeze), but there may not be a history of allergy 



130 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
or hypersensitivity. Accompanying hypotension is 
frequent, due to marked vasodilatation, pooling of The patient with diminished 
blood and a consequent reduction in venous return consciousness
to the heart. Knowing the common causes of the 
allergy and the ability to recognize urticaria are The definition of ‘consciousness’ may be the (waking) 
important. Once recognized, detailed clinical assess- state of awareness of oneself and environment. The 
ment is inappropriate; immediate resuscitation is absence of awareness, therefore, even when one is 
required with intramuscular adrenaline (epinephrine) stimulated, may implicate diffuse or multifocal brain 
and intravenous fluids. dysfunction and may be defined as ‘coma’ or ‘dimin-

Neurogenic shock is another form of distributive ished consciousness’. Although the last two terms 
shock and is very rare. It is due to disruption of the may be seen as synonymous, the term ‘coma’ may 
vasomotor tone of blood vessels causing inappropriate have widespread and conflicting implications. In these 
dilatation and pooling of blood with a marked reduc- situations, ambiguity should be avoided, and the 
tion in venous return and consequently cardiac output. patient should be described as having ‘diminished 
A history of either spinal trauma or medical interven- consciousness’.
tion (e.g. epidural anaesthesia or autonomic blocking Consciousness is controlled by the brainstem 
agents) will usually prompt its consideration as a through a system of nerve cells and fibres known as 
diagnosis. the ‘reticular activating system’ or the ‘ascending 

arousal system’. The cerebrum helps maintain con-
Obstructive shock sciousness and alertness and at least one hemisphere, 

as well as the reticular activating system, must be 
Most commonly, obstructive shock occurs with functioning normally to maintain consciousness. The 
massive pulmonary embolism in which obstruction brain’s ability to adjust its activity and consciousness 
to blood flow through the pulmonary circulation levels can therefore be impaired in several ways, 
reduces venous return to the left atrium and ventricle particularly when both cerebral hemispheres are 
so markedly that cardiac output into the systemic suddenly and severely damaged, when the reticular 
circulation falls and hypotension develops. Patients activating system malfunctions, when blood flow or 
will be breathless and usually have chest pain. The the amount of nutrients (such as oxygen or sugar) 
combination of clinical signs of right heart strain with supplying the brain decreases or when toxic substances 
hypotension and hypoxia should prompt consideration impair brain function.
of massive pulmonary embolism. Obstruction to the There are several ways to objectively describe the 
outflow of the left ventricle occurs with severe aortic conscious state, though perhaps the two best known 
stenosis, although usually this condition develops ‘scores’ are the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) and 
over a prolonged period of time. the ‘AVPU’ score (Tables 9.9 and 9.10). The GCS 

Table 9.9  The Glasgow Coma Scale
1 2 3 4 5 6

Eyes Does not Opens eyes in response Opens eyes in Opens eyes N/A N/A
open eyes to painful stimuli response to voice spontaneously

Verbal Makes no Incomprehensible Inappropriate words Confused, Orientated, N/A
sounds sounds disoriented converses normally

Motor Makes no Extension to painful Abnormal flexion to Flexion or Localizes painful Obeys 
movements stimuli (decerebrate painful stimuli withdrawal to stimuli commands

response) (decorticate response) painful stimuli

Table 9.10  The ‘AVPU’ score (a simplification of the Glasgow Coma Scale)
Alert Voice Pain Unresponsive
A fully awake (although not The patient makes some kind of The patient makes No response to 
necessarily oriented) patient response (eyes or voice or motor) when some kind of response voice or pain
This patient will spontaneously open prompted by questions, e.g. ‘Are you ok?’ (eyes or voice or motor) 
eyes, will respond to voice (although The patient’s eyes may open, or the when pain stimulus is 
may be confused) and will possess response may simply be a moan or used on them
motor function slight movement of a limb



SECTION Two
131

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
attributes a score, ranging from 3 to 15. It was origi- meningism by assessing nuchal rigidity (diminished 
nally devised to assess the level of consciousness after neck flexion with otherwise retained neck movements) 
head injury, although now is used for almost all and knee extension with the patient supine, with the 
acutely presenting patients. When faced with a poorly hip and knee preflexed (pain on knee extension is 
conscious patient, the usual pairing of resuscitation Kernig’s sign).
and diagnostics should be followed. Severe neuro A very brief description may be made here of 
logical conditions may affect upper airway tone, common pathologies leading to changes in conscious 
respiratory drive (e.g. Cheyne–Stokes respiration), level:
vasomotor tone and cardiac rhythm. Also, if the cause ■	 Vascular lesions include cerebral arterial or 
of the brain dysfunction is systemic (Table 9.11), this venous thromboses leading to infarcts. 
will need to be dealt with. Therefore, it is paramount Intracranial haemorrhages may be subarachnoid 
that the ‘airway, breathing, circulation’ (ABC) algo- or intracerebral. Relevant cases should be 
rithm is given due respect. The airway should be referred early to stroke units or neurosurgeons.
supported appropriately (if necessary with endotracheal ■	 Primary cranial infections may manifest as 
intubation), the ‘recovery’ lateral position may be meningitis, encephalitis or meningoencephalitis. 
required in the unintubated patient to prevent aspira- One may also become acutely encephalopathic 
tion, hypotension may require vigorous intravenous from widespread non-infective inflammatory 
fluids and monitoring will be required for hypertension vascular lesions. With infective and 
and cardiac dysrhythmias. inflammatory pathologies, changes may or may 

After resuscitation, one should focus on rapidly not be evident on cranial imaging. Treatment 
identifying the cause of brain dysfunction (Table with antibiotics and/or antiviral agents will 
9.11). If there is an obvious systemic cause, this initially be empirical, and should not be 
should already have been dealt with. A brief history withheld in favour of preceding lumbar 
from witnesses may reveal preceding hemiparesis, puncture, especially if the patient is critically 
headache, trauma, fit, recreational drug or alcohol unwell.
intake, or a history of cancer, diabetes, liver or renal ■	 After trauma, extradural and subdural 
disease. Examination should include a full body haematomata may be suspected, as may 
inspection for features of trauma, fundoscopy, cranial subarachnoid and intracerebral haemorrhages. 
nerves and motor function (including power, tone The condition known as ‘diffuse axonal injury’ 
and reflexes). The power, sensory, cerebellar and (DAI) refers to extensive lesions in white 
visual assessments may not be possible due to lack matter tracts, and is one of the major causes of 
of cooperation. One should attempt to examine for unconsciousness after head trauma. ‘Concussion’ 

is the most common type of traumatic brain 
injury, where there is temporary loss of brain 
function with a variety of subsequent physical, 

Table 9.11  Logical thinking in the poorly conscious patient cognitive and emotional symptoms. There are 
usually no changes visible on imaging, and 

Primary cranial diffuse or Primary cranial diffuse symptoms usually resolve spontaneously over 
multifocal disease, where disease where no structural days or weeks. Relevant cases should be referred 
structural lesions will be lesions will be obvious on early to the neurosurgical unit.
obvious on imaging imaging ■	 Non-convulsive status epilepticus as a cause of 
Vascular Infection altered consciousness is often overlooked. There 
Infection Inflammation will often be no obvious clinical clues other 
Inflammation Trauma (‘concussion’) than eye deviation or involuntary eye 
Tumours Non-convulsive status movements. Often, the unconscious patient  
Trauma epilepticus or postictal state who has been intensely investigated in the 

Psychiatric (conversion, emergency department, and who spontaneously 
stupor) becomes more alert over the subsequent hours, 

Secondary cranial Secondary cranial disease: will have had an unwitnessed seizure.
disease: systemic metabolic ■	 If opioid overdose is suspected, one may 

consider administering the opioid antagonist 
Hypoxia/anoxia Alcohol naloxone. This may be essential if the 
Hypotension Drugs unconscious state is affecting the airway. If the 
Hypothermia Hypoglycaemia vital observations are stable, however, the 

Endocrine disturbance benefit of rapid opioid reversal should be 
(sodium balance, thyroid weighed against the disadvantages (e.g. 
disturbance) disorientation, aggression, vomiting, removal of 
Liver analgesia).
Renal ■	 The psychiatric patient (with or without a 
Non-cranial infection known past history) may have a poor 



132 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.12  Relationship of pupillary changes to site of anatomical damage
Unilateral pathological 

Unilateral pathological dilatation (mydriasis) constriction (miosis) Mid-point pupil
Pupillary fibres close to the origin of the third cranial nerve Hypothalamic damage may lead Mid-brain 
are especially susceptible when uncal herniation or a to ipsilateral Horner’s syndrome damage: the 
posterior communicating aneurysm compresses the nerve Pontine damage may lead to mid-point pupil 
This mydriasis is usually accompanied with sparing of bilateral miosis shows no 
oculomotor function Lateral medullary and reaction to light
When pupillary fibres more distal in the third cranial nerve ventrolateral cervical cord 
are affected, the mydriasis usually occurs together with lesions may lead to ipsilateral 
oculomotor dysfunction Horner’s syndrome

consciousness level from conversion disorder, or Table 9.13  Logical thinking for conditions causing syncope
stupor secondary to depression or schizophrenia. 
Often, the diagnosis will be made after Mechanism Common or important examples
preceding exhaustive negative tests, and will Cardiac structural Valvular heart disease
need an expert assessment by the psychiatrist. disease Obstructive cardiomyopathy

Pupillary examination deserves special mention. Atrial myxoma
As pupillary pathways are resistant to metabolic Severe systolic dysfunction
insult, the identification of absent pupillary reflexes Cardiac dysrhythmia Any dysrhythmia
usually implies structural pathology. The brainstem Pulmonary Acute pulmonary embolism
areas governing conscious level are anatomically close hypertension (poor Any cause of chronic pulmonary 
to the areas controlling the pupils and so pupillary left atrial filling) hypertension
changes help to identify brainstem pathology causing 
altered conscious level (Table 9.12). ’Steal’ syndromes Subclavian ‘steal’

Investigations, as always, should be targeted to the Nervous system ‘Vasovagal’
index of suspicion from clinical assessment. Those mediated Carotid sinus disease
pertaining to resuscitation, including chest X-ray, Autonomic nerve dysfunction 
electrocardiogram (ECG) and blood sugar, should be (e.g. secondary to alcohol, 
performed on initial encounter. Cranial imaging antihypertensive drugs, 
(usually a cranial CT scan) will be indicated if there hypoglycaemia and diabetes 
is a significant possibility of structural lesions. It mellitus)
should be remembered, however, that the displace- Hypovolaemia Blood loss
ment of the patient to the radiology department may Diarrhoea
carry major risk, particularly if the patient requires Vomiting
general anaesthesia for intubation. Therefore, the 
advantages of performing neuroradiology should 
always be measured against risk. A lumbar puncture 
may be required; contraindications according to The syncopal patient
existing national and local guidelines should be 
referred to and, if present, the procedure should be Syncope is a frequent cause of presentation to hospital 
deferred. An electroencephalogram (EEG) may reveal and the emergency department. It may be defined 
abnormalities consistent with a seizure disorder. as temporary loss of consciousness with rapid onset 
Plasma alcohol may easily be measured, and may and spontaneous recovery. The implication is that 
lend support to a clinical diagnosis of alcohol toxicity. there is temporary, global hypoperfusion to the brain. 
Some, though not all, hospitals are able to perform The brevity of the event is mostly limited to a few 
urine toxicology analyses for recreational and other minutes. Although the causes of syncope are often 
drugs. Plasma levels for paracetamol, salicylates and not sinister (the most common cause is a vasovagal 
anticonvulsant medications are also easily available. episode), the consequences may be catastrophic if, 
These may be relevant in cases of deliberate or for instance, the onset occurs while driving. The 
inadvertent self-harm. Some plasma levels for drugs condition should therefore always be taken seriously 
are only available in specialist ‘poisons’ units. It is (Table 9.13).
therefore often good practice to have a saved sample It is likely from the above definition that the 
of serum, which may subsequently be transported if doctor will meet a patient who has fully preserved 
required. Tests of renal function and liver function brain function and a history (or collateral history 
(including blood clotting) should be included in the from witnesses) of recent syncope, thereby exclud-
context of altered conscious level. ing patients with ongoing brain dysfunction and 



SECTION Two
133

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
altered conscious level (discussed elsewhere in Table 9.14  Simple terminology for seizures
this chapter).

When the duration of the period of loss of con- Term Description
sciousness is unknown or thought to be prolonged, Generalized Involvement of the whole cerebral 
the possibility of seizures should be considered. This seizure cortex and therefore abnormalities 
impression may be reinforced by the presence of (e.g. convulsions) may be seen in the 
tongue biting, urinary incontinence, preceding aura whole of the body
or unusual behaviour, ongoing drowsiness, confusion Consciousness is always impaired
or headache or a collateral history of involuntary Focal Involvement of a focus in the cerebral 
movements during the episode. The approach to (partial) cortex and therefore abnormalities 
patients with seizures is discussed elsewhere in this seizure (e.g. convulsions) may be seen in one 
chapter. part of the body

The history of the syncopal event will not be Consciousness may be retained 
complete when told by the patient, though events (simple partial seizure) or impaired 
preceding and following it may be recounted. It is (complex partial seizure)
important, therefore, that any witnesses of the event There may be secondary 
are available to give a collateral history. Dramatic generalization (i.e. a focal seizure 
sequelae such as motor vehicle accidents or personal leading on to a generalized seizure)
injury will prompt urgent investigations. The history Convulsive For example tonic-clonic, tonic and 
should explore any relationship between syncope seizure clonic
and exertion, chest pain, palpitations, dyspnoea, Non- The term ‘absence seizure’ should 
posture changes, body fluid losses and overt bleeding. convulsive generally be avoided unless a specific 
A careful drug and alcohol history should be taken seizure syndromic diagnosis is being made 
and a past history of heart and lung disease or diabetes by a clinician experienced in epilepsy
noted. A family history of sudden death should be 
taken very seriously. Status Historically, one definition has been 

One should examine for an implanted cardiac epilepticus ‘prolonged seizures for more than 30 
device (such as a pacemaker), irregular or rapid heart minutes’, although in modern times it 
rate and heart murmurs. Measurement of lying and is more sensible to accept that ‘any 
standing blood pressure is mandatory unless there is prolonged seizure’ may be classified 
a clear alternative cause. Investigations could initially as status epilepticus
include full blood count, ECG, echocardiography and 
24-hour ECG monitoring. Formal autonomic function 
testing may be needed.

or not. It should be remembered that a diagnosis 
of seizures may lead to social and employment 

The patient with seizures consequences (including the ability to drive), so it is 
crucial to establish a credible collateral history together 

One definition of ‘seizure’ is the ‘uncontrolled electri- with a detailed history from the patient. Tongue 
cal activity in the brain, which may produce a physical biting and post-event drowsiness, headache or confu-
convulsion, minor physical signs, thought disturbances sion may help lend support to a diagnosis of seizures. 
or a combination of symptoms’. ‘Epilepsy’ is a pattern Although urinary and faecal incontinence is often 
of repeated seizures. The occurrence of a seizure or quoted, it is not a strong differentiating feature 
‘fit’ is a common mode of presentation to the emer- between seizures and non-seizures.
gency department. In most cases, the final diagnosis The diagnosis of non-convulsive status epilepticus 
will not be epilepsy. may be missed unless specifically thought of. The 

If the patient is actively having a seizure, the ‘ABC’ patient may present with non-specific features, such 
of resuscitation should be meticulously followed. as prolonged confusion or drowsiness. On occasions 
Intravenous anticonvulsant agents should be admin- there may be clinical features to arouse suspicion 
istered promptly, within the constraints of formulary such as nystagmoid eye movements or repetitive 
guidelines. The aim should be to suppress the seizure (often stereotypic for the patient) movements of the 
as quickly as possible. If there is no success with tongue, jaw or limbs.
standard anticonvulsants, the administration of a Some conditions are commonly misdiagnosed as 
general anaesthetic (together with intubation, ventila- seizures. Severe exacerbation of extrapyramidal disease 
tion and admission to intensive care) should be may mimic myoclonus. Vasovagal episodes may, on 
considered. The definition of ‘status epilepticus’ is occasions, be followed by jerking of the limbs. Pseu-
under continuous scrutiny (Table 9.14). doseizures (seizures simulated by patients for psy-

If the patient is not actively having a seizure at the chological and other complex reasons) are often 
time of clinical assessment, the task is to identify difficult to differentiate from genuine seizures, even 
whether the episode preceding admission was a seizure for many experienced neurologists (Table 9.15).



134 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.15  Awareness of conditions commonly contractions. Persistent fever together with other 
misdiagnosed as seizures abnormal observation such as tachycardia and raised 

respiratory rate may suggest the presence of an 
Condition Awareness infection. If there is genuine doubt as to whether the 
Pseudoseizure The reasons for patients presenting with fever is related to the seizure or an infection, one 

contrived movements mimicking seizures should look vigorously for a source of infection 
are complex. They often occur in known (including performing a lumbar puncture) and 
epileptics. The risk of death is consider administering empirical intravenous antibiot-
significantly higher in epileptic patients ics while awaiting investigations. One should examine 
with pseudoseizures, and so the latter for evidence of cranial trauma, alcoholic foetor and 
needs to be taken seriously and not severe hypertension.
merely dismissed as a non-organic In the drowsy postictal patient, some aspects of 
event. Many epilepsy experts maintain neurological examination such as visual fields, vol-
that with increasing clinical experience, untary eye movements, cerebellar function, power 
there is increased awareness of the and sensory deficits will be difficult or impossible to 
difficulty in the differentiation of seizures ascertain. However, the following should be performed 
from pseudoseizures. There are, however, to a high standard: fundoscopy; pupillary, corneal and 
some features which may lend support to gag reflexes; limb tone; limb reflexes; and spontaneous 
the diagnosis of pseudoseizures: limb movement. Any asymmetry should be noted 
resistance to attempted eye opening by and it may prompt urgent investigations.
the clinician, limb thrashing and pelvic Blood sugar should be performed urgently, as 
thrusting, full alertness immediately hypoglycaemia may be quickly reversed and brain 
after the event (i.e. lack of postictal injury prevented. Plasma biochemistry and liver 
drowsiness) and down-going plantar function tests will identify reversible electrolyte 
responses during attack deficiencies and features of liver disease. Possible 

Vasovagal Prolonged vasovagal episodes may lead infections should be identified with the help of white 
episode to cerebral hypoperfusion and brief, cell count, blood culture and urinalysis. Toxicology 

self-limiting convulsive-type movements tests may include blood alcohol and urine drug 
Cranial This is particularly seen in sports events, analysis. Women of childbearing age should have a 
trauma where cranial trauma may lead to brief, pregnancy test. Patients with unexplained seizures 

self-limiting convulsive-type movements, and a history of travel abroad should have parasite 
similar to those seen in vasovagal analysis. If the patient has no known identity and 
episodes therefore no known past history, plasma anticonvulsant 

analysis may lend support to recent ingestion and 
Extrapyramidal Patients may present with worsening or therefore the possibility of previously diagnosed 
disease poorly controlled Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy.

manifested as severe coarse tremor A cranial CT scan will be required if one or more 
which, to the untrained eye, may of the following are present: the seizure is unexplained, 
resemble myoclonus there are features of cranial trauma, there are focal 

or lateralizing features, there are fundoscopic features 
of raised intracranial pressure and there are features 

In history taking, there is considerable overlap with of infection. The gross features uncovered by a cranial 
the principles described for the patient with syncope. CT may include intracranial haemorrhage or space-
It is essential that witnesses are available to give a occupying lesions. Although it is a misconception 
collateral history, as the seizure itself will not be that a CT scan is always required prior to lumbar 
recalled by the patient. However, on recovery, the puncture, it is overwhelmingly recognized that lumbar 
events preceding and following the seizure may be puncture for the investigation of meningitis in the 
recounted by the patient. As with syncope, dramatic patient with seizures should always be preceded by 
sequelae such as motor vehicle accidents or personal a cranial CT. The cerebrospinal fluid from the lumbar 
injury should be taken seriously. It should be estab- puncture should be analysed for meningitis and for 
lished whether there is a known history of epilepsy. subarachnoid haemorrhage. An EEG may be per-
In patients with known epilepsy, a history should be formed acutely to lend support to the diagnosis of a 
taken for compliance, anticonvulsant changes, concur- postictal state and occasionally to identify features 
rent illnesses, alcohol intake and lifestyle issues. In of herpes encephalitis.
other cases, specifically ask about alcohol intake, Once a seizure is diagnosed, the clinician should 
recreational drug usage, diabetes, head injury, foreign advise the patient of his duty to contact the driving 
travel and pregnancy. licensing authority, who in turn will issue guidelines 

General examination will include the assessment for cessation of driving for a defined period. The 
of features of infection. Mild, transient, fever is a diagnosis of epilepsy should be made by an expert 
common phenomenon after seizures from muscle in epilepsy, as this diagnosis will have social and 



SECTION Two
135

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
drug-therapy implications. The epilepsy expert will Table 9.16  Logical thinking for conditions causing  
also decide, together with the patient, on the clinical acute confusion
value of prescription of anticonvulsants after a first 
seizure. Mechanism Common or important examples

Infection Urine, chest
Inflammatory Acute pancreatitis, vasculitis, 

The patient with acute confusion ischaemic bowel, myocardial 
ischaemia

Patients with acute confusion are often seen in the 
emergency setting. Often, the patient will have pre- Drugs and Prescription drugs, recreational drug 
existing cognitive dysfunction, which may have been external toxins usage, alcohol (toxicity or withdrawal)
present for weeks, months or years. It is important The most severe form of alcohol 

in this scenario to investigate both the acute confusion withdrawal is ‘delirium tremens’, a 

and the pre-existing pathology. Remember that those condition which traditionally starts 

with longer-standing cognitive dysfunction (e.g. up to 3 days after cessation of heavy 

consequent upon cerebrovascular pathology) will be alcohol consumption

more susceptible to episodes of acute confusion when Metabolic Hypoglycaemia, hyperglycaemia, 
affected by minor pathology such as infection and derangement hyponatraemia, hypernatraemia, 
metabolic derangement. In elderly patients, particu- hypercalcaemia, liver dysfunction 
larly, systemic problems such as infections or cardiac (synthetic or cholestasis), uraemia, 
disease may not lead to any symptoms other than thyroid dysfunction, nutritional 
acute confusion. deficiency (particularly vitamin B12, 

The causes and mechanisms of confusion should thiamine and niacin)
be logically arranged in the mind of the clinician Acute pain or Urinary retention, severe constipation
(Table 9.16). Toxaemia from infections, inflammation anxiety
and drugs will lead to varying degrees of cerebral Psychiatric issues Depression, schizophrenia
dysfunction, as will metabolic derangements. Any Hypoxaemia Chest infection, pulmonary oedema, 
episode of acute pain or anxiety affects intellectual pulmonary embolism
function. Poor cerebral oxygenation will occur with Circulatory Cardiac disease (dysrhythmia, 
episodes of hypoxia and diminished cerebral perfusion impairment systolic dysfunction), sepsis, 
from circulatory impairment. Any brain pathology haemorrhage, prolonged vagal 
may cause cerebral dysfunction; one should be aware episode
that in these cases, confusion may progress to dimin- Brain pathology Haemorrhage, ischaemia, seizure 
ished consciousness level. The possibility of underlying disorder, infection (encephalitis and 
psychiatric disorder should be borne in mind, par- meningoencephalitis), head injury, 
ticularly in the younger patient. cerebral vasculitis

The history, as in cases of altered conscious level, 
syncope and seizures, will often not be meaningful 
when given by the patient. The collateral history 
from relatives and other sources is therefore para-
mount. The presence of any long-standing cognitive disorder. The presence of pain on palpation and 
issues should be established. Specific, directed abnormalities on chest examination should be identi-
questioning should deal with the presence of head fied. Neurological examination will elicit any gross 
injury, pain (including chest pain), breathlessness, focal or lateralizing features and also features of 
light-headedness, headache and features of infection. meningism. The examination should also include an 
A meticulous history should be taken for drugs and abbreviated mental test (see Ch. 7 on elderly medi-
alcohol. Nutritional history should be explored and cine). The latter will objectively document the confu-
the presence of established chronic diseases such as sion and help track any progress.
diabetes, seizure disorders, liver, kidney or thyroid Unless the diagnosis is absolutely clear, investigations 
disease documented. Previous psychiatric illness and may commence with full blood count, C-reactive 
long-standing mood changes should be noted. protein, standard electrolytes, liver function, thyroid 

The examination should be targeted, as the patient function, vitamin B12, urinalysis, urine and blood 
will most likely not be able to comply with compli- cultures, chest X-ray, toxicology, blood alcohol (to 
cated directions which are required in neurological help differentiate alcohol withdrawal from toxicity), 
and other assessments. Start with the ‘vital’ observa- ECG and arterial blood gases (if low oxygen saturation 
tions: oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, blood is identified). If there is evidence of focal or lateralizing 
pressure (erect and supine) and heart rate. Pyrexia, features, meningism, altered conscious level or 
features of head injury, smell of alcohol, cachexia unexplained headache, a cranial CT scan should be 
and features of jaundice or uraemia should be looked considered. A lumbar puncture should be performed 
for. There may be obvious features of a thyroid if meningitis remains a consideration.



136 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.17  Logical thinking for conditions causing acute 
The patient with acute headache headache

Many patients present to the emergency department Mechanism Common or important examples
with severe acute headache. This will either be a Vascular – Subarachnoid, intracerebral, 
‘worst ever’ exacerbation in the context of chronic, haemorrhage subdural, extradural
long-term headache or a first presentation of Vascular – Migraine, temporal arteritis, 
headache. occlusive carotid artery dissection

On initial presentation, it should be established 
whether there have been any additional features Muscular Tension-type headache

which may suggest sinister pathology. One should Meningeal irritation Meningitis (bacterial, viral), 
specifically enquire about severity (is this the ‘worst subarachnoid haemorrhage
ever’?); rapidity of onset (implying vascular pathology Raised intracranial Space-occupying lesion (tumour, 
such as subarachnoid haemorrhage); recent head pressure abscess, localized haemorrhage), 
injury; loss of consciousness; altered intellect; features malignant hypertension, benign 
of sepsis; features of meningism (photophobia and intracranial hypertension
neck stiffness); features of raised intracranial pressure Drugs and toxins Oral or sublingual nitrates, 
(headache exacerbated by straining, coughing and carbon monoxide
lying flat); asymmetry (consistent with temporal Carbon dioxide Obstructive sleep apnoea, 
arteritis and glaucoma, as well as migraine and retention from obesity hypoventilation syndrome
sinusitis); and blurred visual disturbance (consistent respiratory failure
with raised intracranial pressure, glaucoma and Tropical disease Malaria, any one of the tropical 
temporal arteritis). endemic encephalitides

There are additional features that need clarification. Upper respiratory Influenza, sinusitis
A past history and temporal patterns of long-standing tract infections
headache need to be established, as does the presence Intraocular pressure Glaucoma
of coexisting illness. Viral infections and pneumonia 
are not uncommonly associated with headache. Foreign Neuralgia Trigeminal neuralgia, cluster 
travel may be relevant as well as the drug history. headache

It is important to be aware of some distinctive 
features of the more common causes of headache 
(Table 9.17). Distinctive features in the history of a headache is typically unilateral and pulsating. The 
patient with a subarachnoid haemorrhage include a acute period often lasts between 4 and 72 hours, and 
sudden-onset, occipital ‘worst ever’ headache (clas- there may be accompanying nausea, vomiting, 
sically described as like being kicked on the back of photophobia, phonophobia (increased sensitivity to 
the head). There may have been an episode of loss sound) or osmophobia (sensitivity to pungent smells).
of consciousness (this may be seen in up to half of The examination should include identification of 
all patients presenting with subarachnoid haemor- general and specific features of sepsis, such as pyrexia, 
rhage). Features of meningism and raised intracranial tachycardia and signs of lung consolidation. Altered 
pressure are not uncommon. Urgent investigations consciousness level should have been detected on 
(cranial CT scan, with targeted lumbar puncture) initial encounter and immediately acted upon. Altered 
and specialist referral are paramount. Bacterial intellectual function and disorientation, though, may 
meningitis may be rapidly fatal, and treatment with only be apparent later in more detailed conversation. 
intravenous antibiotics must commence as soon as A history of neck stiffness should prompt an examina-
the diagnosis is suspected. Viral meningitis is usually tion of nuchal rigidity in which there is a painful 
less dramatic, although this is not inevitably the case. deficit of neck flexion with relative preservation of 
The headache of meningitis is of acute onset and all other neck movements. When meningism is 
severe. There are accompanying features of photo- suspected, both legs should also be examined where 
phobia and neck stiffness. In severe cases, there may each leg in turn is bent at the hip and knee at 90° 
be features of raised intracranial pressure. Although angles; if subsequent further extension in the knee 
pure encephalitis does not produce features of mening- is painful (leading to resistance), this should be 
ism, meningoencephalitis does. Temporal arteritis is described as a ‘Kernig’s positive’ sign, which in turn 
a form of vasculitis in which the temporal arteries suggests that there is significant inflammation of the 
are inflamed and tender. The headache is usually meninges. Positive features of meningism should 
asymmetrical. There may be pain in the jaw with prompt the clinician to search for a non-blanching 
chewing (‘jaw claudication’). Vision changes (blurred purpuric rash, which may lend support to a diagnosis 
vision) should prompt urgent treatment with steroids of meningococcal meningitis. A full neurological 
(to prevent complete loss of vision), followed by examination should identify any focal or lateralizing 
specialist referral and confirmation of the diagnosis motor or sensory abnormalities, and also any cranial 
with a temporal artery biopsy. The migrainous nerve or cerebellar deficits. One should look for 



SECTION Two
137

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
papilloedema on fundoscopy. Additional areas of be reserved for the original definition of ‘reduced 
clinical examination may include palpation of the motor power’, many patients will confess to ‘weakness’ 
temporal arteries or the sinuses, looking for tenderness when in fact they are ‘fatigued’ or ‘lethargic’. It is 
in these areas; examination of the scalp, looking for reasonable to infer reduced motor power when 
herpetic lesions; and inspection of the sclerae, looking weakness is present without significant tiredness. This 
for the acute red eye of glaucoma. should be contrasted with fatigue and lethargy, where 

In cases of suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage, the diminished power is generalized, commensurate 
a cranial CT is not diagnostic in all cases, particularly with and caused by significant tiredness. This should 
more than 24 hours after the acute event. If the form the basis of initial questioning. (’Do you feel 
diagnosis is suspected and the CT scan is normal, a weak because you are tired, or do you think that you 
lumbar puncture is mandatory to exclude the diagnosis have specifically lost muscle power?’) Sometimes, 
and is best done more than 12 hours after the onset even with an experienced history taker and a coopera-
of symptoms. If encephalitis is suspected, a magnetic tive patient it may not be possible to differentiate 
resonance image (MRI) should be considered. Lumbar between weakness, fatigue and lethargy. The term 
puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis should be ‘fatigue’, which is used here synonymously with the 
performed when meningitis is suspected. Antibiotics term ‘lethargy’, should not be confused with the 
should never be withheld while waiting for the lumbar neurological term ‘fatiguability’ (Table 9.18).
puncture. Other investigations which may help When assessing the patient, it is also helpful to 
identify or support a diagnosis are chest X-ray, white differentiate between lesions of the ‘upper motor 
cell count, blood culture, parasite analysis for malaria neuron’ (lesions of the motor cortex or pyramidal 
and viral serology. In unexplained headache, particu- tracts) from the ‘lower motor neuron’ (lesions of 
larly in the presence of drowsiness, plasma carboxy- the ‘motor unit’, that is the anterior horn cell, 
haemoglobin may support a diagnosis of carbon axon, neuromuscular junction or muscle). This dif-
monoxide poisoning. ferentiation is important in order to help direct 

investigations.
Acute quadriparesis and paraparesis deserve special 

The acutely weak patient mention. It should be assumed that the cause is 
external cord compression until proven otherwise. 

The term ‘weakness’ will often be used by patients As recovery from the latter depends on speedy 
for a variety of complaints. Although the term should decompression, one should urgently organize imaging 

Table 9.18  Logical thinking for conditions causing acute weakness
Scenario Common or important examples
Fatigue or lethargy leading to Chronic heart failure, chronic lung disease, sleep disorders, anaemia, chronic kidney disease, 
generalized weakness diabetes mellitus, chronic infection, malignancy, depression
Loss of motor power leading Myasthenia gravis (crisis), post-infectious inflammatory polyneuropathy (‘Guillain-Barré 
to generalized weakness syndrome’), acute myopathy (myositis, rhabdomyolysis)
Hemiparesis or hemiplegia Lesion in contralateral cerebral motor cortex or contralateral brainstem
(weakness or total paralysis Lesion in ipsilateral high cervical cord (often with ipsilateral dorsal column, i.e. proprioception 
of one side of body) deficit, and contralateral spinothalamic tract deficit, i.e. pain and temperature)
Monoparesis or monoplegia Lesion in contralateral cerebral motor cortex, contralateral brainstem
(weakness or total paralysis Lesion in ipsilateral spinal cord (often with ipsilateral dorsal column, i.e. proprioception 
of single limb) deficit, and contralateral spinothalamic tract deficit, i.e. pain and temperature)

Lesion of nerve roots
Mononeuropathy or mononeuritis multiplex

Paraparesis or paraplegia Lesion in parasagittal cerebral motor cortex
(weakness or total paralysis Lesion in spinal cord (external compression, ischaemia, inflammation, e.g. transverse myelitis, 
of both legs) infection, intramedullary space-occupying lesion)

Post-infectious inflammatory polyneuropathy (‘Guillain-Barré syndrome’), acute myopathy 
(myositis, rhabdomyolysis)
Lesion of nerve roots and cauda equina lesions – usually affects one leg more than the other
Mononeuropathy or mononeuritis multiplex – usually affects one leg more than the other

Quadriparesis and Lesion in brainstem
quadriplegia (weakness or Lesion in upper cervical cord (external compression, ischaemia, inflammation, e.g. transverse 
total paralysis of both arms myelitis, infection, intramedullary space-occupying lesion)
and both legs) Post-infectious inflammatory polyneuropathy (‘Guillain-Barré syndrome’), acute myopathy 

(myositis, rhabdomyolysis)



138 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
and specialty assessment. Any delay in imaging should Table 9.19  Logical thinking for conditions causing acute 
not lead to a delay in specialty assessment. abdominal pain

The history should establish the speed of onset 
and distribution of weakness. Rapid onset of weakness Mechanism Common or important examples
over minutes suggests a vascular pathology, whereas Enteral visceral Oesophageal spasm or oesophagitis, 
an onset over hours or days is more indicative of an pain (usually duodenal ulcer, small bowel 
infective or inflammatory condition. Associated pain colicky pain) enteritis or ischaemia, colitis, 
is most often a consequence of nerve root or peripheral colonic obstruction or ischaemia, 
nerve involvement and also occurs with acute myo- complex gut perfusion deficit 
pathy, in which there may be muscle tenderness. A (diabetic ketoacidosis, sickle crisis)
careful drug history should be taken to identify agents Non-enteral Gallbladder pain from cholecystitis, 
such as chemotherapy drugs which may cause visceral pain pancreatic pain from pancreatitis or 
peripheral neuropathy, and a family history enquiry malignancy
may uncover inherited muscle disorders. Risk factors Peritoneal pain Perforated enteral viscus (gastric, 
for stroke, such as hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, (exacerbated by duodenal, small bowel, appendix, 
diabetes mellitus, alcohol intake and smoking history, any changes in large bowel), perforated non-enteral 
should be documented. intra-abdominal viscus (gallbladder, spleen, ruptured 

On general inspection, look for gait disturbance, pressure such ectopic pregnancy), inflamed organ 
facial palsy, muscle wasting and fasciculation. Test as coughing, (pancreatitis), spontaneous 
for tone and reflexes before testing power, as muscle moving) bacterial peritonitis, malignant 
tone may be affected by pre-existing muscle contrac- infiltration, bleeding vessel
tion. Diminished tone and diminished reflexes are 
seen in lower motor neuron conditions. In addition Non-visceral Aortic aneurysm, renal colic, referred 
to formally testing power, a quick functional test for pain pain
power is to ask the patient to stand from a sitting 
position, testing hip and knee extension; walk on his 
heels, to test ankle dorsiflexion; and walk on his toes, 
to test ankle plantarflexion. Coordination should be the periumbilical area, whereas large bowel pain 
tested in the upper limbs (finger-to-nose tests) and is usually found over the site of the pathology or 
lower limbs (heel-to-knee-to-toe), although one should lesion (e.g. splenic flexure); pain from the distal 
be aware that weakness in itself will affect coordina- colon may be referred to the lumbar area; any 
tion. Sensory examination, testing for sensory loss, pathology affecting or irritating the diaphragm (e.g. 
paraesthesiae, hyperaesthesiae and pain, will be a subphrenic abscess) may present with referred pain 
meaningful only in cooperative and coherent patients. in the shoulder; ureteric colic usually radiates from the 
This should not prevent the clinician from attempting flank to the inguinal area on the affected side (‘loin 
to establish sensory deficits consistent with nerve, to groin’). (See Table 9.19.)
nerve root or central pathology. In contrast, pathology in areas distant to the abdo-

Timely cranial CT scans are essential in stroke, men may present with referred or radiated pain in 
while MR scans are useful in a variety of cranial and the abdomen. For example, pneumonia, pleuritis and 
spinal cord lesions. The spinal cord MR scan should pleural effusions may manifest as upper quadrant 
be booked as an emergency when cord compression pain on the affected side, and pain due to myocardial 
is suspected. Nerve conduction studies and electro- ischaemia may be felt most in the epigastrium. When 
myography (EMG) are useful to confirm the diagnosis taking a history, establishing the abdominal location 
of Guillain-Barré syndrome and on occasion will help of pain will help identify the affected organ, using the 
differentiate peripheral nerve from nerve-root principles outlined above. The speed of onset of pain 
pathology. is also relevant; rapid onset may be associated with 

vascular catastrophes and rupture. The timing of the 
last menstrual period and the possibility of pregnancy 

The patient with acute abdominal pain should be considered in younger women. There may 
be an association between eating and abdominal pain: 

It is important to be familiar with some principles exacerbation by food may indicate gastritis, intestinal 
governing the location of pain. Oesophageal, gastric obstruction or gut ischaemia, whereas rapid relief 
or duodenal pain may be evident over the lower upon eating may be suggestive of peptic ulceration. 
chest or epigastrium (and oesophageal pain may The presence of diarrhoea with or without blood may 
radiate to the arms); gallbladder pain usually com- be suggestive of gut infection, inflammatory bowel 
mences in the right upper quadrant and often radiates disease or gut ischaemia.
around the right chest wall to the right dorsal area; The examination should initially focus on general 
pancreatic pain usually localizes over the epigastrium features, such as hydration and cachexia, and vital 
and radiates through to the back; pain from the parameters including respiratory rate, peripheral 
small bowel is often manifested diffusely or over pulses, heart rate and blood pressure. Peritonitis may 



SECTION Two
139

Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿

Table 9.20  Logical thinking for conditions causing haematemesis or melaena
Mechanism Common or important examples
Peptic ulcer disease Gastric or duodenal (with or without Helicobacter pylori colonization)
Inflammation of upper Reflux oesophagitis, gastritis, duodenitis (the latter two often occur secondary to 
gastrointestinal tract excess alcohol intake or usage of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Oesophageal and/or gastric varices, Portal hypertension from chronic liver disease
or portal hypertensive gastropathy
Coagulopathy or increased bleeding Liver synthetic dysfunction, altered warfarin metabolism (infection, antibiotics), 
tendency clotting factor deficiencies, thrombocytopenia, anti-platelet drug usage (aspirin, 

clopidogrel), recent thrombolytic therapy – note: over-anticoagulation may reveal 
bleeding from specific pathology previously unknown

Upper gastrointestinal malignancy or Oesophageal carcinoma, gastric carcinoma, upper gastrointestinal angiodysplasia 
malformation (vascular malformation)
Mallory–Weiss tear Tear of lower oesophagus or upper stomach from recurrent vomiting
Nose bleeds (epistaxis) A large amount of swallowed blood may lead to melaena

particularly be associated with severe hypotension or its presence may suggest acute bleeding from any 
shock. Abdominal distension consistent with intestinal source proximal to the ascending colon, the most 
obstruction should be noted. Initial palpation may common source is in the upper gastrointestinal tract 
reveal diffuse, severe tenderness consistent with (Table 9.20).
peritoneal inflammation, or localized tenderness. The passing of fresh blood per rectum (as opposed 
Rectal examination should be performed as a matter to melaena) usually means that the source of bleeding 
of routine; rectal masses and evidence of bleeding per is in the large or small bowel. However, it is possible 
rectum should be identified. If there is any suspicion for very rapid upper gastrointestinal bleeding to lead 
of pelvic pathology in women, a gynaecological assess- to fresh blood per rectum as there is insufficient time 
ment is necessary. for melaena to develop. Patients who incidentally 

General investigations which may help include full describe dark stools without the characteristic appear-
white cell count, haemoglobin, urea and electrolytes, ance and smell of melaena do not usually have 
liver function tests, amylase and pregnancy test (for gastrointestinal bleeding. Iron-stained stool is black 
the appropriate age group). Samples of diarrhoea but usually solid and formed.
should be sent for Clostridium difficile toxin analysis The history should enquire about epistaxis, 
and also culture. A chest X-ray may demonstrate a alcohol intake, pre-existing liver disease and both 
perforated viscus or primary chest pathology. Erect prescription and over-the-counter drugs. One severe 
and supine abdominal films may show features of or several episodes of vomiting before the onset of 
obstruction. Abdominal ultrasound may demonstrate haematemesis may suggest a Mallory-Weiss tear. 
biliary tract dilatation or ureteric stones. Abdominal Epigastric pain may suggest peptic ulcer disease, and 
CT scans may reveal free fluid, the site of intestinal unexplained weight loss and anorexia is suggestive of 
obstruction, pancreatic structure, evidence of ruptured malignancy.
aortic aneurysm or some detail with regard to intra- The initial examination should focus on identifying 
abdominal masses. Sigmoidoscopy may be useful if if the patient is in shock and acting accordingly (see 
inflammatory bowel disease is suspected. above). Young, otherwise fit hypovolaemic individuals 

may compensate with raised cardiac output and 
remain normotensive for some considerable time but 

The patient with haematemesis  exhibit a fall in blood pressure on sitting or standing 
and/or melaena up. Features of malignancy (cachexia, supraclavicular 

lymphadenopathy, abdominal mass) and chronic liver 
Haematemesis and melaena are common causes of disease (spider naevi, palmar erythema, jaundice, 
presentation to the emergency department. The term splenomegaly, ascites) should be noted. The clinical 
‘haematemesis’ describes the vomiting of blood, which features of anaemia could suggest that there has been 
may be bright red and fresh or altered (commonly a period of occult bleeding before the acute bleed. 
described as ‘coffee grounds’). The presence of Rectal examination is mandatory to see if there is 
haematemesis usually means acute bleeding from a objective evidence of melaena or fresh blood.
source above the duodenojejunal flexure. ‘Melaena’ The initial investigations should include full blood 
is faeces containing digested blood; they have a black count, clotting screen, urea, electrolytes and liver 
(often described as ‘jet black’) tarry appearance and function tests. Blood should be ‘grouped and saved’, 
a characteristic and offensive smell. Although unless the patient is in shock, in which case, for 



140 9 Patients presenting as emergencies ﻿
example, four units of blood should be ‘cross-matched’ urgent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy varies widely 
immediately. Blood is the best replacement fluid for among hospitals and different healthcare systems. 
a patient in shock with gastrointestinal bleeding but Whatever the local provision, it follows, rather than 
should not necessarily be given immediately for the replaces, prompt and effective resuscitation in the 
stable patient who is anaemic. The availability of patient in shock.



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Patients with a fever 10 
Caryn Rosmarin and Ali Jawad

Introduction behavioural responses. The centre of this mechanism 
is called the thermoregulatory centre. It lies in the 

Fever is one of the most common presenting features hypothalamus and acts like a thermostat in controlling 
in any doctor’s practice. It is the hallmark of the the systems to produce the right balance of heat 
body’s response to infection or inflammation. Before production and loss. The thermoregulatory centre 
looking at the causes of fevers it is important to has heat-sensitive receptors which respond to changes 
understand what we mean by the term and how the in body temperature by switching on and off systems 
reaction is generated in the body. to keep the balance within normal range. The range 

Fever is an increase in the core body temperature of temperature considered normal by the hypothala-
(the temperature within the deep tissues of the body) mus is termed the set point (Fig. 10.2). Damage to 
above the daily range for an individual. The daily the hypothalamus can lead to loss of its thermostat 
range of core body temperature is between 35.6°C control and result in very high or low core body 
and 37.8°C (97.0°F and 100.4°F). The closest to core temperatures.
body temperature we can measure is rectal tempera- Heat is gained and lost by the body through normal 
ture. As this is usually not easily performed and is body functioning. Heat is produced all the time in 
less acceptable to patients, the next best is ear the tissues of the body as a product of their metabolic 
(tympanic) temperature. This requires a specific device processes. Heat is also produced by increased activity 
that can be inserted into the ear using disposable of skeletal muscles, such as during exercise or when 
covers. Oral temperature is about 0.5°C less than ear shivering.
temperature and axillary temperature a further 0.5°C Normally this heat is lost to the environment 
lower than oral temperature. through transfer from deep tissues, via the blood 

The normal core temperature of any individual stream, to body areas in contact with the outside. 
does not remain static but varies according to certain This is mostly through the skin but also occurs through 
rhythms and characteristics. It is affected by time of the lungs. Heat loss occurs through four main mecha-
the day (known as diurnal variation), age, gender, nisms called evaporation, convection, conduction and 
height, time in the menstrual cycle, as well as with radiation as described in Box 10.1.
exercise and meals. The amount of heat lost from the skin via the 

The diurnal variation of core body temperature is above mechanisms depends on environmental condi-
usually up to 0.6oC but can be exaggerated with a tions with more heat loss occurring in cold, dry 
variation of 2-3oC. Core body temperature is at its and windy environments. When the temperature of 
highest in the late afternoon and evening, with lowest the environment is higher than body temperature 
point in the early hours of the morning (Fig. 10.1). or when there is a lot of humidity, heat cannot 

easily be lost, leading to a rise in body temperature 

How is normal core body  (Fig. 10.3).

temperature regulated? What effects on thermoregulation lead  
Control of body temperature is termed thermoregula- to fever?
tion, and under normal circumstances the body 
temperature will be in a state of stable internal Despite fever being an indicator of an abnormal 
temperature, or in homeostasis. clinical finding, it is a normal physiological response. 

The temperature of the body depends on the While fever is an increase above normal in the core 
balance between heat production and heat loss. Core body temperature, it is not an indicator that the 
body temperature is regulated by a system of control thermoregulatory system has lost control of its 
mechanisms affecting heat generation and heat loss. thermostatic function. It is rather a function of the 
These include the autonomic nervous system, the up-regulating or resetting of the set point of the 
endocrine system, musculoskeletal system and thermoregulatory centre to a higher level, much like 



142 10 Patients with a fever ﻿
38°

37.5°

37°

36.5°

36°

35.5°

35°
4:00 am 6:00 am 8:00 am 12:00 pm 4:00 pm 8:00 pm 12:00 am 4:00 am 6:00 am

Figure 10.1  Diurnal variation of core body temperature. 

Increases Increases Reduces heat gain Exposing body to Loose Increased
heat loss heat loss cold environment clothing

Decreased basal body
Sweating Vasodilation metabolic rate temperature

Reduced Voluntary Cooling
activity responses drink

Parasympathetic Sympathetic
nervous system nervous system

activated inhibited Temperature-sensitive
receptors in skin

and hypothalamus

Thermostat in hypothalamus
activates cooling mechanisms

Thermostat in hypothalamus
Hypothalamus activates warming mechanisms

Temperature-sensitive
receptors in skin

and hypothalamus Increase Sympathetic
thyroid Shivering

nervous system
hormone activated Generates heat

Seek heat
Eat Voluntary

responses source

Decreased Increase basal Vasoconstriction Piloerection
body metabolic rate

temperature Increase Warm Reduces Traps air layer
muscle activity clothing Generates heat heat loss for insulation

Figure 10.2  Regulation of core body temperature. 

Box 10.1  Mechanisms of bodily heat loss turning up the thermostat to a higher temperature. 
So long as the reset temperature remains below the 

Evaporation: Sweating and panting cool by increasing heat range of the normal function of the thermoregulatory 
loss centre (<41.5°C) it will function to keep the body 
Convection: Increasing blood flow to body surfaces leads to at this higher temperature. Above this temperature, 
heat loss the centre can no longer function to control body 
Conduction: Losing heat by being in contact with a  temperature and the fever is termed hyperpyrexia, 
colder surface, e.g. swimming in cold water or lying on  a medical emergency requiring immediate and rapid 
a cold floor cooling of the body.
Radiation: Increased exposure of the body surface will lead Hyperthermia, on the other hand, is an example 
to increased heat loss of a high temperature that is not a fever. It differs 

from a fever in that it is not associated with a change 
in the set point of the thermoregulatory centre but 
occurs due to raising the body temperature above 



SECTION Two
143

Patients with a fever ﻿

ABNORMAL heat gain
1. Excessive metabolic processes

a. Drugs
2. Preventing heat loss – mostly through 

preventing of sweating
a. Hot environment
b. High humidity
c. Inhibiting sweating (drugs)

HEAT GAIN = increased body temperature 

NORMAL heat gain
Metabolic processes
Exercise
Shivering

NORMAL heat loss Vasoconstriction
Sweating HOMEOSTASIS = normal body temperature (35.6–37.8°C) 
Breathing
Vasodilation
Cold environment

HEAT LOSS = decreased body temperature  

ABNORMAL heat loss
Excessive sweating
Extremely cold environment

Figure 10.3  Mechanisms of thermoregulation and disregulation. 

the normal set point. It can be caused by heatstroke, cytotoxic effects of lymphocytes, impairment of the 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyper- growth and virulence of bacteria and evidence of 
thermia, and stimulants such as amphetamines and survival benefit for individuals with an elevated body 
cocaine. temperature in response to infection.

Fever is produced when a stimulus from either On the other hand, there are negative effects of a 
outside (external) or inside (internal) the body is raised body temperature. Oxygen consumption and 
detected by the body’s immune system as foreign, fluid and calorie requirements increase; increased 
and a host of immune responses occur. External metabolic activity can increase stress if organs are 
stimuli are usually in the form of infectious agents failing; inflammatory cytokines increase muscle 
or drugs, while internal stimuli may be in the form breakdown; and fever can reduce mental acuity, cause 
of antibodies or damaged tissue. These (perceived) delirium and can trigger convulsions, especially in 
foreign objects activate the cells of the immune children.
system to release chemical mediators called cytokines, Therefore there is indication to treat fever in those 
including TNF-α, interferon, IL-1 and IL-6. These who are pregnant, in children, in those with impaired 
cytokines act on the hypothalamus to reset the set organ function, or those with a very high temperature 
point to a higher temperature, or to ‘turn up the of >41.5°C.
thermostat’. Some bacterial proteins can act directly Fever can be treated by increasing heat loss through 
on the thermoregulatory centre in the hypothalamus physical cooling or by resetting the upregulated 
to cause the same effect. hypothalamic set point using antipyretics.

Elevation of the internal set point results in a higher 
core body temperature and causes the individual to The patterns of fever
feel cold. This leads to increased generation of heat 
and reduction of heat loss in the form of peripheral Fever can reveal a characteristic pattern in some 
vasoconstriction and shivering. Rigors are a form of diseases and this pattern of rise and fall of temperature 
severe shivering. may be a clue for diagnosis (Fig. 10.4).

Should you always treat a fever? Approach to a patient with a fever – 
As fever is a physiological response of the body, it causes of fever
must have some inherent value, so is there a need to 
always be so quick to reduce it? Benefits of having Fever is one of the commonest presenting features 
a high temperature include an increase in the phago- at medical facilities around the world. Although it is 
cytic and bactericidal activity of neutrophils and the a characteristic sign of infection, not all fever is 



144 10 Patients with a fever ﻿

Sustained/continuous: Persistent rise in temperature with Step-ladder fever:  A type of sustained fever where the temperature 
minimal (<1°C) diurnal variation. rises gradually to a higher level with every spike.

Causes: Pneumonia, meningitis, urinary tract infection, brucella Causes: Typhoid, typhus 

Sustained fever Step-ladder
fever

Normal range Normal range

1 2

Intermittent: Exaggeration of the normal circadian rhythm. If Remittent: Temperature spikes fall daily with diurnal variation of 
the variation between high and low is extremely large it is >2°C, but don’t go down to normal.
called hectic. Causes: Tuberculosis, infective endocarditis, many viral and 

Causes: Deep seated infection,  abscesses, kala-azar, bacterial infections 
malignancy, drug fever  

Intermittent fever Remittent fever

Normal range Normal range

3 4

Relapsing: Febrile episodes are separated by intervals of Inverse fever: The temperature rises in the early hours of 
normal temperature. morning rather than in the evening

Causes: Malaria, borrelia (relapsing fever), tuberculosis, Causes: Some cases of miliary tuberculosis
lymphoma 6

Relapsing fever

Night sweats: In some diseases, the rise in body temperature is 
Normal range evident only in the evening or late at night when the patient is woken 

up sweating. This pattern is seen when the mild rise in temperature is 
added to the normal diurnal evening rise leading to the body 
temperature rising beyond the normal level.

 If this occurs daily, it is called quotidian fever. Causes: Tuberculosis, leukaemia, lymphoma, 
Causes: Plasmodium falciparum autoimmune disorders 

A double quotidian fever occurs when there are two spikes 7
of fever every day, generally once in the morning and once 
in the evening.

Causes: Miliary tuberculosis Temperature-pulse disparity: This is the counter-intuitive response 
If it occurs every 48 hours it is called tertian fever. of a slower pulse associated with a high fever, commonly associate 

Causes: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, with typhoid fever.      
Plasmodium ovale 8

If it occurs every 72 hours it is called quartan fever.
Causes: Plasmodium malariae 

Quartan fever

Normal range

5

Figure 10.4  The patterns of fever. 

associated with an infectious cause. It is also a feature cases, the temperature subsides spontaneously and 
of a number of non-infectious inflammatory diseases no cause is identified (Box 10.2).
(autoimmune connective tissue and autoinflammatory The likelihood that fever is due to an infection 
disease and vasculitis) and neoplasms. It may also differs from one area of the world to another and 
occur as a drug reaction. In a significant number of reflects the burden of disease in the particular country 



SECTION Two
145

Patients with a fever ﻿

Causes of fever - India Causes of fever - Europe 

Infections
6%

15% 23% 27%
Neoplasms

50%
9% Connective

tissue diseases
21% 13%

Miscellaneous
20%

17%
Undiagnosed

Figure 10.5  Causes of fever in India and Europe. 

Box 10.2  Causes of fever presenting complaint and the associated complaints 
as part of the systematic history.

■	 Infections
■	 Non-infectious inflammatory diseases History of the presenting complaint

–	 Autoimmune inflammatory Details of the fever itself should be taken and the 
–	 Autoinflammatory pattern described as continuous, intermittent or 
–	 Vasculitis recurrent as noted above. Ask whether the fever is 

■	 Malignancy worse in the morning or at night. Some open-ended 
■	 Miscellaneous causes such as drug reactions questions should be followed by direct questions to 
■	 Undiagnosed elicit the finer distinguishing characteristics of the 

fever. Remember that the taking of antipyretics, 
anti-inflammatories or antibiotics can mask a fever, 
so ask the patient if he has taken any medication. 

(Fig. 10.5). It is also important to remember that the Enquire as to the duration of fever, which should 
very young and the very old may have a serious reflect when the patient first noticed having fevers. 
infection without producing a fever. This differs from the onset of fever that may be 

sudden or gradual; the former more likely to represent 
History a more virulent disease, while the latter suggests a 

more indolent one. A description of the fever should 
As with any medical condition, the starting point of include the presence or absence of rigors (profound 
diagnosis is a detailed and meticulous history. The chills associated with exaggerated shivering and 
history taking should follow a logical scheme to chattering of teeth), which usually indicates a rapidly 
ensure important questions are not missed, as causes rising temperature found in malaria or severe bacterial 
of fever have a broad aetiology and can present as sepsis.
multisystem diseases. Taking a ‘Fever History’ is unlike High fever of more than 39oC is the initial symptom 
any other, as it does not focus on a particular body in most patients with adult onset Still’s disease 
system. Aspects of the personal, general and specific (AOSD). The classic fever pattern is one or two daily 
histories of all other systems need to be explored. febrile spikes exceeding 39oC, usually occurring late 

All histories should begin with an introduction, during the day. At times the fever is continuous or, 
stating clearly your designation as a trainee, student less commonly, there is an early morning spike.
or observer. Ensure you have the correct patient and 
that the patient understands the language. If the Personal history
patient is a minor or a guardian or parent is present, While the patients name, age and date of birth are 
be aware that certain sensitive questions may have used as identifiers, the country of birth and countries 
to be asked at a later time when you are alone with of residence are the first questions of the infection 
the patient. history. These are important both in respect to disease 

exposures and disease protection in the form of 
Main presenting complaint childhood and other vaccinations. Rates of diseases 
Patients presenting with fever will often have a raft such as tuberculosis are higher in people who were 
of associated complaints, many or all of which may born or resided in a country with a high incidence 
be perceived as the main problem to the patient. It of tuberculosis, even if they have left the country. 
is therefore prudent to refer to the fever as the main Vaccination schedules differ among countries and 



146 10 Patients with a fever ﻿
following this, immunity to certain childhood diseases ■	 Recreational habits, especially illicit drug use or 
may vary. tattoos.

■	 Sexual habits are vitally important and patients 
History of associated and  may need some encouragement to be open and 
constitutional symptoms honest about these risks. Unprotected sexual 
These include the presence of any of the following: practices increase the risk of both sexually 
■	 Headache is a non-specific symptom and does transmitted diseases and blood-borne viruses.

not differentiate the cause of the fever. A severe ■	 Food habits including ingestion of unpasteurised 
headache associated with photophobia or milk or cheese.
vomiting could indicate meningitis. Vasculitides ■	 Taking of appropriate prophylaxis, including 
affecting the head and neck vessels may present vaccinations, either when travelling or at home.
with headache. ■	 Travel is one of the most important histories to 

■	 Muscle aches (myalgia) is again a non-specific explore. Detail of the destinations include 
finding present in all causes of fever. If whether the stay was in an urban or rural 
infectious, myalgia is more suggestive of setting, stay was with family or friends, in a 
infection with intracellular pathogens, hotel or without facilities (Box 10.3).
particularly viral infections and malaria.

■	 Joint pain (arthralgia) is an additional Past medical and surgical history
non-specific symptom and may be caused by While all past history is important to obtain, certain 
multiple infectious and non-infectious aspects play a more important role as risks for 
aetiologies. In a patient complaining of infections.
arthralgia, one should distinguish between ■	 Infections are more frequent and more serious 
mono-arthralgia (single joint) and poly-arthralgia in patients with diabetes. A past history of 
(multiple joint) involvement. rheumatic heart disease increases the risk for 

■	 Presence or absence of a rash is particularly infective endocarditis. Previous TB assumes a 
important to enquire about, as many infections risk of recurrence.
and autoimmune disorders are associated with  ■	 Immune compromise increases the risk, severity 
a typical rash both in pattern and evolution. and scope of infections. The patient’s immune 
The rash may not be present at the time of status should be determined, specifically by 
consultation or may have changed over the asking about underlying diseases such as HIV, 
course of the illness. Ask details about the rash medications such as steroids or chemotherapy 
history, finding out where on the body it began, or a history of a splenectomy.
its associations, where it spread, whether the ■	 Recent hospitalisation is associated with 
lesions changed over time and, if no longer hospital-acquired multiresistant pathogens.
present, how it resolved. Further details to help ■	 Surgery, invasive procedures, medical devices, 
the diagnosis include details on the colour, type implants and transfusions all provide means for 
of lesion (e.g. vesicle, pustule, lacey) and introduction of infectious agents.
whether it was pruritic, painful or neither. ■	 Antibiotic use may select for more resistant 

■	 Weight loss in a patient with a fever suggests a pathogens and increases the risk of antibiotic-
more chronic process and is a classic feature of associated diarrhoea. Antibiotics may also 
tuberculosis (consumption) or malignancy.

■	 A full systematic history should be included 
looking for a pattern of disease in systemic 
infectious or non-infectious disease, or a specific 
organ source of infection – e.g. cough, Box 10.3  Infections to consider if there is a history  
abdominal pain, dysuria, diarrhoea and redness of travel
or pain of skin or soft tissue.

Sub-Saharan Africa – malaria, reproductive tract infection 
History of behaviours and exposures are (RTI), diarrhoeal illness, HIV, rickettsia, haemorrhagic 
important in infectious diseases fevers, TB, hepatitis
■	 Contact with anyone having similar symptoms South East Asia – dengue, malaria, diarrhoeal illness

or living with someone who has been treated Sub-Continent Asia/India – enteric fever, dengue, malaria, 
for an infection. diarrhoeal illness, hepatitis

■	 Living arrangements including access to clean South America – diarrhoeal illness, RTI, dengue, malaria, 
water and sanitation, proximity to animals or mosquito-borne viruses
rodents. A history of insect or animal bite or Central America/Caribbean - diarrhoeal illness, RTI, 
scratches. dengue, malaria, mosquito-borne viruses

■	 Occupation, hobbies and sports, especially those 
involving exposure to water, animals or North America/Europe – influenza, HIV, Lyme, tick-borne 
healthcare. viruses, TB (eastern Europe)



SECTION Two
147

Patients with a fever ﻿
provide protection against infection in certain with a whitish vaginal discharge and vaginal 
groups of immune compromised patients. itching.

■	 A history of immune compromise, radiation, •	 Bacterial vaginosis is not considered a true 
toxin exposure or certain chronic infections may infection but rather an imbalance of normal 
increase the risk of certain malignancies. vaginal flora and overgrowth of anaerobes. It 

■	 A family history of non-infectious inflammatory presents with watery, foul-smelling vaginal 
diseases can indicate a genetic predisposition discharge.
that may increase the risk of developing a 
non-infectious inflammatory disease. Gastrointestinal tract

Abdominal pain is central to almost all gastrointestinal 
Systematic history causes of infections. It is important to characterise 

the pain including the site and radiation, associated 
Symptoms focussing on specific organ systems will abdominal symptoms and relieving and aggravating 
provide direction towards the likely diagnosis when factors.
considering infectious causes of fever. Malignancies ■	 Gastroenteritis is the commonest 
may also be found in any organ system. Non-infectious gastrointestinal infection and is associated with 
inflammatory diseases tend to affect multiple systems abdominal pain and diarrhoea, with or without 
together, although a single system may predominate. vomiting. Characterising the diarrhoea may  
The following detail focuses on infectious causes of help in narrowing the aetiology due to the 
fever. characteristic pathogenesis of some of the 

gastrointestinal pathogens. Determining whether 
Respiratory tract the diarrhoea is acute or chronic can distinguish 

•	 Upper respiratory tract infection is suggested infective from non-infective causes. Direct 
by rhinorrhoea, nasal stuffiness, sneezing, sore questions to ask about diarrhoea include: 
throat, cough and a hoarse voice. frequency, colour and consistency, presence of 

•	 Sinusitis is likely to cause facial pain and mucous and/or blood in the stool (rather than 
headache. just on the paper).

•	 Otitis is associated with ear pain, ear ■	 Hepatitis is usually caused by viral agents but 
discharge with or without auditory symptoms can also occur as a complication of medications 
such as deafness. or other toxins. Jaundice is the classic sign of 

•	 Lower respiratory tract infections present hepatitis, along with a history of exposure to 
with a cough, productive of purulent sputum, risk factors involving contact with body fluids or 
shortness of breath, wheeze or chest pain. excretions.
Haemoptysis (coughing blood) suggests ■	 Cholecystitis and cholangitis classically present 
invasion of or damage to the blood vessels of with pain in the right upper quadrant of the 
the lung. This is present in tuberculosis, abdomen associated with nausea with or 
invasive fungal infection or non-infectious without jaundice.
causes such as lung cancer or vasculitis. ■	 Other forms of intra-abdominal infection 

including bowel perforation and peritonitis 
Genitourinary tract present with varying abdominal symptoms 

•	 Lower urinary tract infection classically including generalised or localised abdominal 
presents with a combination of dysuria, pain, bowel distension, diarrhoea, constipation 
frequency, urgency, change in smell and or vomiting.
colour of urine.

•	 Upper urinary tract infection may have the Nervous system
above (or a history of the above) with Headache, photophobia, vomiting, altered conscious-
additional loin or back pain. ness, fits, fainting, muscle weakness, numbness, 

•	 Sexually transmitted infections and pelvic paralysis, tremor, abnormal sensation and change of 
inflammatory disease can present with the behaviour can all suggest an infection of the central 
same symptoms as a lower or upper urinary nervous system. In neonates and young children the 
tract infection but may have the additional symptoms of infection are mostly non-specific.
symptoms of a vaginal or urethral discharge, Patients with multisystem non-infectious inflam-
dyspareunia (pain during intercourse), matory diseases can have central and peripheral 
anogenital ulcers, genital warts, painful nervous system symptoms. A variety of neurological 
swelling of the scrotum, pubic itch or complications can be present including spinal cord 
swelling of lymph glands in the groin. involvement in rheumatoid arthritis, neuropsychiatric 

•	 Vaginal candidiasis is not uncommon in involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus and 
women, particularly those who use vaginal neurological sequelae in vasculitic disorders.
douches or after a course of antibiotics. It Certain predisposing factors play a role in various 
may present as urinary tract infections do forms of nervous system infection. A history of 



148 10 Patients with a fever ﻿
immune suppression, head injury and neurosurgery logic signs in severe typhoid fever and meningeal 
should be elicited. signs in HIV seroconversion illness.
■	 Meningitis is an inflammation of the 

subarachnoid space and meninges (membranes Skin and soft tissue
covering the brain and spinal cord) most often A detailed history of any skin conditions should be 
secondary to an infection. It classically presents sought, even if this is not present at the time of 
with headache, vomiting, neck stiffness and consultation. Many skin conditions and rashes have 
fever. Depending on the duration of onset, a characteristic course, may fluctuate or change over 
meningitis can be classed as acute, subacute or time and therefore a full ‘progress report’ of the 
chronic. Acute meningitis develops over hours condition can help to guide the diagnosis. The presence 
to days, chronic meningitis over weeks or longer, of a rash is more likely to suggest a systemic than 
and may last for months to years; while localised condition. Many multisystem non-infectious 
subacute meningitis is in between the two, inflammatory diseases have an associated rash, such 
usually over weeks.

■	 Acute meningitis is most often bacterial, with as the typical butterfly facial rash of systemic lupus 
the frequency of pathogens differing according erythematosus and petechial rash in vasculitic 
to age group and immune status. Some forms of disorders.
acute bacterial meningitis (meningococcal Remember to ask about any insect or tick bites, as 
disease) can present with a typical purpuric rashes following a bite (including an eschar at the 
non-blanching rash and may be associated with bite site) could indicate a vector-borne disease.
severe sepsis and shock. Viral meningitis is It is important to distinguish a generalised rash 
usually less severe and self-limiting and often illness from a localised skin or soft tissue lesion. The 
begins with symptoms of a viral infection such latter is more likely to be asymmetrical or unilateral, 
as fever, malaise, headache and muscle aches. involve tissues deeper than the skin, affect surrounding 

structures and be associated with localised enlarged 
■	 Head injury increases the risk of meningitis by 

damaging the protective layer of meninges and lymph nodes.
allowing respiratory or skin flora into the Some examples of localised infections include:

■	 Impetigo is a contagious infection caused by 
protected subarachnoid space. Neurosurgery staphylococci or occasionally streptococci, found 
predisposes to infection with the above and also mainly in preschool children or in other ages 
hospital-acquired pathogens.

■	 Chronic meningitis presents with the same associated with playing contact sports. It usually 
symptoms as acute, only over a more prolonged starts as a small pustule around the nose or 
period. Associated features should be sought for mouth which bursts, oozes fluid and leaves a 
the more common causes of chronic meningitis golden crust. It characteristically occurs in 
including tuberculosis, cryptococcus and Lyme groups of lesions.

■	 Cellulitis is a bacterial infection of the skin 
disease. involving deeper structures most commonly 

■	 Encephalitis is inflammation of the brain tissue 
resulting in altered level of consciousness, affecting the leg. There are other causes of a red 
headache and fever. Additional symptoms may or swollen leg and these should be excluded 
be present depending on the site of infection before the diagnosis is made. Cellulitis is rarely 
and include seizures, tremors, stroke, bilateral. Certain groups of people are at 
hallucinations and abnormal behaviours. increased risk, including diabetics. It can affect 
Encephalitis is usually viral in aetiology but may any area of the body and facial cellulitis should 
also be bacterial (e.g. syphilis) or parasitic (e.g. be managed as a medical emergency.

■	 Necrotising fasciitis is a severe and rapidly 
toxoplasmosis).

■	 spreading form of cellulitis. It is a medical 
Intracranial abscesses are bacterial infections of 
the CNS and include brain abscess, subdural or emergency and requires urgent surgical as well 
extradural empyema, classified according to as antibiotic management.

■	 A history of human or animal bite or scratch 
their anatomic location. These abscesses occur preceding the infection is important to elicit as 
secondary to seeding from a primary site, either specific pathogens are associated with these, 
from a contiguous one such as in otitis media, including blood-borne virus transmission.
sinusitis, mastoiditis or dental infection; 
secondary to haematogenous spread from a 
remote site such as endocarditis; after a head Musculoskeletal system
injury or neurosurgery and, rarely, following Bone, joint and muscle pain can form part of the 
meningitis. constitutional symptoms of infectious and non-

Not all patients with nervous system symptoms infectious diseases.
and fever have a primary nervous system infection. ■	 Joint infections occur in both native and 
Some systemic infections can cause neurological prosthetic joints. A history of joint replacement 
symptoms such as severe or cerebral malaria, neuro- or joint procedure such as arthroscopy increases 



SECTION Two
149

Patients with a fever ﻿
the risk of infection developing in the joint. In a 
patient complaining of arthralgia, one should Examination
distinguish between monoarthralgia (single 
joint) and polyarthralgia (multiple joint) General assessment
involvement. Monoarthralgia is more likely to Examination should begin when you first make 
be a septic arthritis in the affected joint while visual contact with the patient. Get a general impres-
polyarthralgia suggests a more systemic disease. sion of whether the patient looks well, unwell or 
Many viral infections and collagen vascular severely ill.
diseases present with polyarthralgia. Summaries of the pertinent features are described 

■	 Bone infection (osteomyelitis) can occur in any in Table 10.1.
bone in the body either as a primary infection 
or secondary to an overlying skin or soft tissue 
infection or previous surgical procedure. Bone Systematic assessment
pain, swelling, deformities or pus draining A systematic and thorough examination of all organ 
through the skin overlying a bone should alert systems may be necessary to elicit the cause of the 
you to the possibility of this diagnosis. fever. Both autoimmune disorders and systemic 

■	 Adult onset Still’s disease (AOSD) presents infections may produce clinical findings in multiple 
with a classic triad of persistent high spiking organ systems, and the pattern and collection of signs 
fevers, joint pain and a distinctive evanescent should be able to be collated into a single cause most 
salmon pink, macular or maculopapular rash of the time. It is not unusual for those with compro-
that peaks with the rise in the temperature. The mised immune systems or those who have travelled 
rash occurs mainly on the trunk and extremities to have more than one infection at a time.
but rarely involves the palms of the hands, the 
soles of the feet or the face. Joint pains may Skin and mucous membranes
range from arthralgia to a severe arthritis.  
Other features include lymphadenopathy, Rashes are of particular importance and many infec-
hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, sore throat  tious diseases present with a rash. Describe the 
and constitutional symptoms such as anorexia, location of the rash. Is it generalised, localised, sym-
arthralgia, myalgia, fatigue and weight loss.  metrical or asymmetrical? Rashes may indicate either 
The classic fever pattern is one or two daily a localised or generalised infection. Some rashes are 
febrile spikes exceeding 39oC, usually occurring typical of the causative infection; a few examples 
late during the day. At times the fever is given in Table 10.2.
continuous or less commonly spikes in the  Fever and constitutional symptoms although 
early morning. common in patients with antineutrophil cytoplasmic 

■	 Although fever and constitutional symptoms antibodies (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) rarely 
occur in around half the patients with occur in isolation. Palpable (non-thrombocytopenic) 
polymyalgia rheumatica, they are rarely the purpura is present in half the patients. Erythematous 
dominating features. cutaneous nodules with or without superficial crusting 

may occur on the scalp, elbows, hands and feet 
Cardiovascular system (cutaneous extravascular necrotizing granulomas or 
■	 Infective endocarditis is an infection of the Churg-Strauss granulomas) in patients with granu-

endocardium or lining of the heart. The most locytosis with polyangiitis (GPA) and eosinophilic 
common form of this infection is infection of granulocytosis with polyangiitis (EGPA). Subcutaneous 
the heart valves. Symptoms are usually nodules, skin ulcers, subungual splinter haemorrhages, 
non-specific and the diagnosis should be digital gangrene and livedo reticularis may be seen 
considered in patients with damaged or and, mainly in EGPA, urticarial rash (Box 10.4).
prosthetic heart valves or those patients with Mild fever may accompany around a fifth of patients 
risk factors for recurrent bacteraemias, e.g. poor with Behçet’s syndrome (BS) with active lesions. 
dentition, intravenous drug use, long-term use of Febrile attacks seem to be associated strongly with 
a intravascular device or underlying bowel vascular, neurological or joint involvement. Other 
cancer. features of BS include mouth and genital ulcers, 

■	 Myocarditis is an inflammation of the muscle of 
the heart and is usually caused by viral 
infections. Symptoms are non-specific and may Box 10.4  ANCA-associated vasculitis
include chest pain, shortness of breath or 

■
palpitations. 	 Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA)(Wegener’s 

■	 Vascular infection can occur as primary vascular granulomatosis)
■

infection of the endothelium or secondary to 	 Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) 
damage caused by catheters or cannulas, trauma (Churg-Strauss syndrome)

■
or surgery. 	 Microscopic polyangiitis (PA)



150 10 Patients with a fever ﻿

Table 10.1  General examination in patients with fever
Temperature Oral or ear temperature is preferred to axillary to give a closer indication of core temperature. Ear temperature 

is 0.5°C higher and axillary temperature is 0.5°C lower than oral temperature. Fever is defined as a core 
temperature above normal. In clinical practice this translates to an oral temperature of ≥38.3°C.

Pulse Tachycardia is characteristic during fever. For every 1°C rise in temperature the pulse increases by 10 beats 
per minute. A pulse-temperature dissociation is characteristically seen in typhoid, brucellosis, leptospirosis 
and diphtheria.

Respiratory For every 1°C rise in temperature the respiratory rate rises by 4 breaths per minute. Higher respiratory rates 
rate signify additional lung pathology such as pneumonia.
Blood Hypotension may signify severe sepsis or septic shock.
pressure
Lymph nodes Note the pattern and groups involved. Check cervical, axillary and inguinal areas. Describe the consistency of 

the nodes. Are they firm, hard, regular, irregular, mobile or fixed? Are enlarged lymph nodes unilateral, 
bilateral, above and/or below the diaphragm? Note the size of the lymph nodes and whether there is a single 
or multiple lymph nodes present. Significant lymphadenopathy is found in tuberculosis, brucellosis, 
toxoplasmosis, viral infections such as HIV or infectious mononucleosis. They are also a predominant feature 
of lymphoma and metastatic spread of malignancies.

Jaundice Examine the conjunctivae, nail beds and skin for evidence of jaundice. This may indicate underlying either 
haemolysis such as in malaria and haemorrhagic fevers, or liver disease as in viral hepatitis, cholangitis or 
liver abscess.

Eyes Conjunctivitis may indicate a localised eye infection or be associated with a systemic infection such as 
measles. Roth’s spots on the retina may be found in infective endocarditis. Tubercles of miliary TB may be 
found on the choroid.

Ears Inflammation and redness of the external ear canal indicates otitis externa, while a bulging red eardrum 
suggests otitis media. If the eardrum has perforated, fluid or pus may be found in the external ear canal.

Mouth Examination of the mouth may yield a host of information and should include visualisation of the inner cheeks, 
palate, tongue, pharynx, tonsils, gums and teeth. General oral and dental hygiene should be noted. Lesions on 
the wall of the mouth or palate should be characterised as described for skin rashes below. White lesions may 
indicate oral thrush; the throat and tonsils should be examined for erythema and exudates; ulcers in or around 
the mouth may indicate oral herpes. Dry mouth is a feature of some non-infectious inflammatory diseases.

Skin The entire surface of the skin should be examined, as a lesion or rash may be present only in an area hidden 
to view in a clothed individual. Describe and characterise any rash, petechiae, and areas of redness or 
swelling. Determine if there are any open wounds, ulcers or bite marks, including an eschar. The presence of 
open wounds, intravascular devices or injection sites should be noted and closely examined for signs of 
erythema, swelling or tenderness. Intravascular devices may be the source of either localised skin or 
disseminated infections.

Hands and Splinter haemorrhages on the palms and nail beds require further investigation for infective endocarditis. 
nails Scaly, itchy lesions between the fingers suggest the presence of scabies mites. Typical nail deformities of 

non-infectious inflammatory diseases, such as psoriasis, should be noticed.

erythema nodosum-like lesions, pyoderma gangreno- can be determined by finding dullness to percussion 
sum, folliculitis and uveitis. along with increased vocal resonance of crepitation 

and/or bronchial breathing. Pleural effusion or 
Respiratory tract empyema is suggested by dullness to percussion and 
Perform a full respiratory examination looking for decreased or absent vocal resonance. Cavitation or 
signs of upper respiratory tract infection such as abscess formation suggesting tuberculosis produces 
pharyngitis, tonsillitis, tonsilar abscess (quinsy) or an increase in resonance.
otitis. The presence of rhinorrhoea, nasal congestion, 

Use palpation, percussion and auscultation to sneezing, cough and a hoarse voice suggest a viral 
determine whether there is any suggestion of a lower upper respiratory tract infection.
respiratory tract infection such as bronchitis, pneu-
monia, pleural effusion or empyema, cavitation or Cardiovascular system
lung abscess. The diagnosis of infective endocarditis is based on 

Palpate for tenderness over the sinuses or mastoids. the modified Duke’s criteria. While relying mainly 
Harshening of normal breath sounds may indicate on investigations for confirmation, certain clinical 

inflammation of the bronchi in bronchitis. The pres- signs are suggestive and should be looked for in 
ence of consolidation in the lung indicating pneumonia patients with risk factors. These include new valvular 



SECTION Two
151

Patients with a fever ﻿

Table 10.2  Examples of rashes in patients with fever greenish fish-smelling discharge. A purulent discharge 
coming from the cervix is suggestive of gonococcal 

Maculopapular Scarlet fever, measles (look for infection, while chlamydia causes a more mucoid or 
conjunctivitis and white lesions in the mucopurulent discharge. Cervical warts may appear 
mouth – Koplik’s spots), rubella, as flat or raised.
erythema infectiosum, roseola, typhus, If anal lesions or symptoms are present, a procto-
typhoid (rose spots), dengue, rickettsial scope can be used to examine the rectal mucosa.
infection A bimanual examination is required for palpation 

Vesicular Herpes simplex, chicken pox, shingles, of cervical excitation tenderness, fallopian or uterine 
coxackie virus, allergy tenderness in suspected pelvic inflammatory disease.

Petechial, Meningococcal (non-blanching), viral Male genital examination includes examination of 
purpuric, haemorrhagic fevers, dengue, splinter the penis, scrotum, testes, epididymis, spermatic cord 
haemorrhagic, haemorrhages of infective endocarditis, and anorectum. External examination should note 
vasculitic non-infective vasculitis the presence of any ulcers, warts, excoriations or 
Erythematous Cellulitis, erysipelas, drug allergy rashes. Examine the urethral meatus for any discharge 
Pustular Staphylococcal, disseminated or ulcer not visible on external examination. Examine 

gonococcal infection the scrotum for redness, swelling, ulcers or other 
Rash on palm Enteroviral infections, meningococcal lesions. Tenderness on palpation of the testes and/or 
and soles infection, spotted fever, typhus, infective epididymis may suggest epididymo-orchitis.

endocarditis, secondary syphilis, scabies 
(burrows between fingers and toes) Gastrointestinal tract

Nodular Erythema nodosum, TB, leprosy, Abdominal examination begins by inspection of the 
non-infective vasculitis, Behçet’s patient with an exposed abdomen between the 
syndrome xiphisternum and symphysis pubis (allowing for 

patient privacy).
Determine if ascites or abdominal swelling is present 

regurgitation, temperature >38°C, splinter and and whether the abdomen is tender. Palpate for the 
conjunctival haemorrhages, Janeway lesions (small, presence of hepatomegaly, splenomegaly or a distended 
non-tender red lesions on the palms or soles) and gall bladder and whether any of these organs are 
Osler’s nodes (painful, red raised lesions on hands tender.
and feet). (See also Box 13.25.) Splenomegaly may be present in many diseases, 

Infected thrombophlebitis or vasculitis may occur caused by either increase in its function or by direct 
secondary to a cannula or catheter insertion into a infiltration. Infectious causes of increased function 
vein or as a primary infection of the vessels by certain are due to immune stimulation in response to the 
pathogens (Campylobacter fetus, non-typhi Salmonel- infection and include Infectious mononucleosis, viral 
lae), usually in immunocompromised patients. hepatitis, AIDS, typhoid, brucellosis, tuberculosis, 

histoplasmosis, infective endocarditis, leptospirosis, 
Genitourinary tract leishmaniasis and malaria.
Examine for suprapubic and renal angle tenderness Infective causes of hepatomegaly include infectious 
in suspected cases of urinary tract infection. Note mononucleosis, liver abscess, amoebic infection, 
the presence or absence of a urinary catheter. hydatid cyst, malaria, leptospirosis and actinomycosis. 

Genital examination should be performed with a Viral hepatitis rarely causes an enlarged liver.
chaperone present if requested or when a male clini-
cian is examining a female patient. Nervous system

Female genital examination is best performed in Global examination of the nervous system includes 
lithotomy position to enable ease of examination. cognitive as well as physical function. The level of 
External examination should note any evidence of consciousness can be determined using the Glasgow 
redness, swelling, vaginal, urethral or anal discharge, coma score. Reduced, altered or fluctuating levels of 
vesicles, ulcers, warts or foreign bodies. Unilateral consciousness may be present in any infection of the 
swelling of the labia may indicate an abscess of the central nervous system but is more likely in encepha-
Bartholin’s gland, which can be palpated only when litis and brain abscess than in meningitis.
enlarged. The characteristic triad signs of meningitis include 

The groin should be examined for evidence of nuchal rigidity (neck stiffness), photophobia and 
lymphadenopathy or diseases such as tinea, candida headache. To detect neck stiffness, passively bend the 
or pubic lice. patient’s chin towards the chest. This will elicit pain 

Speculum examination allows examination of the by stretching the inflamed meninges leading to resist-
cervix as well as the vaginal vault. If a discharge is ance in movement. Other signs caused by pain on 
present, describe its consistency. Candidiasis is white stretching the inflamed meninges include Brudzinski’s 
and cheesy, while trichomonas infection gives a frothy and Kernig’s signs.



152 10 Patients with a fever ﻿
Kernig’s sign is positive when the thigh is bent 90 About one fifth of patients with relapsing poly-

degrees at both the hip and knee, and the knee is chondritis present with fever and in the absence of 
then straightened leading to pain and resistance. chondritis of the external ear and the nose, the 
Brudzinski’s sign is positive if the patient involuntary diagnosis may be difficult to make.
lifts their legs when the clinician lifts the patient’s 
head off the examination bed. Multisystem diseases

Focal neurological signs could be suggestive of a Fever in autoinflammatory periodic syndromes
space-occupying lesion such as a brain abscess, Apart from familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), the 
tuberculoma or toxoplasmosis. Focal signs may also autoinflammatory periodic syndromes are rarely 
be present due to cranial nerve involvement caused encountered in routine clinical practice (Box 10.5). 
by meningitis. Nearly 90% of patients with FMF become sympto-

Some forms of NS infection have associated matic before the age of 20 years. However, genetic 
features which should be noted. Meningococcal testing has helped diagnose mild disease in adults. 
meningitis may occur with a typical purpuric non- More males are affected than females. A typical acute 
blanching rash. attack, usually lasting 1 to 3 days, is characterized by 

fever, serositis, and arthritis or skin rash. The attacks 
Musculoskeletal system may recur every few weeks but may be as infrequent 
Joint infections occur in both native and prosthetic as every few years. Acute abdominal pain, due to 
joints. A history of joint replacement or joint proce- acute sterile peritonitis, occurs in 90% of patients. 
dure such as arthroscopy increases the risk of infection Pleurisy is another clinical feature but mainly occurs 
developing in the joint. In a patient complaining of in patients of Armenian origin. The term FMF is 
arthralgia one should distinguish between mono confusing as in a significant number of cases, there 
arthralgia (single joint) and polyarthralgia (multiple is no family history, no Mediterranean roots (Arabs, 
joint) involvement. Monoarthralgia is more likely to Armenians, Italians and Jews), and fever may be 
be a septic arthritis in the affected joint while poly absent. The patient may present with acute arthritis 
arthralgia suggests a more systemic disease. Many or an erysipelas-like erythema (neutrophilic derma-
viral infections and collagen vascular diseases present tosis) with mild or even absent fever. The arthritis 
with polyarthralgia. may last up to a week.

Bone infection (osteomyelitis) can occur in any bone Nearly two thirds of patients with polyarteritis 
in the body either as a primary infection or secondary nodosa develop fever and constitutional symptoms 
to on overlying skin or soft tissue infection or previous (arthralgia, myalgia, malaise and weight loss). Hyper-
surgical procedure. Bone pain, swelling, deformities tension, usually mild, is present in up to half the 
or pus draining through the skin overlying a bone patients, particularly in those with hepatitis B viral 
should alert you to the possibility of this diagnosis. infection. Cutaneous lesions include livedo reticularis 
Spinal infection can affect the bone itself as in Pott’s (Fig. 10.6), ischemic changes in the digits (Fig. 10.7), 
disease caused by tuberculosis or the intervertebral subcutaneous nodules and ulcerations.
disc, most often caused by staphylococcal infection, Fever and constitutional symptoms may be the main 
when spinal percussion is often tender. clinical features in patients with Takayasu’s arteritis. 

Rheumatic fever can occur in any age group but In more than half the patients there is decreased or 
is rare under the age of 3 and above 15 years. In absent peripheral pulse. In a small number of patients, 
Western countries, acute rheumatic fever is generally the inflammation of the wall of the carotid artery 
preceded 2 to 4 weeks by group A streptococcal may cause local tenderness (carotidynia).
(GAS) tonsillopharyngitis but not by GAS skin Fever in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus 
infections. Fever is one of the four minor manifesta- (SLE) can prove a challenging clinical problem. Fever 
tions of rheumatic fever and may be high or low. may be a major feature in about two fifths of patients 
The period between the GAS infection and the onset with active SLE. Infection is not easy to exclude and 
of rheumatic fever is free of clinical features and the fever may be drug induced. Very rarely the fever 
C-reactive protein is normal. The most common may be caused by lymphoma complicating lupus. 
major manifestation of rheumatic fever is arthritis The most challenging situation is when the patient 
followed by pancarditis, chorea (Sydenham’s), ery- with lupus presents with high fever, respiratory 
thema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules. symptoms and radiographic changes. The difficulty 

Although fatigue is a prominent complaint in 
idiopathic inflammatory myositis, fever occurs mainly 
in patients with juvenile dermatomyositis and Box 10.5  The classic periodic fever syndromes 
antisynthetase syndrome. Other features include (monogenic autoinflammatory diseases)
Raynaud’s phenomenon, hyperkeratosis especially of 

■	 Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF)
the radial side of the index fingers (mechanic’s hands), 

■	 TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS)
polyarthritis and interstitial lung disease. These 

■	 Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with periodic fever 
patients have positive antiaminoacyl-tRNA synthetase syndrome (HIDS)
antibodies such as Jo-1.



SECTION Two
153

Patients with a fever ﻿

Table 10.3  Mechanisms of drug fever
Mechanism Examples
Hypersensitivity Anticonvulsants, penicillin, 

minocycline, sulfonamide, 
allopurinol

Altered thermoregulatory Thyroxine, drugs with 
mechanisms anticholinergic activity, 

amphetamine, cocaine
Directly related to Paraldehyde, pentazocine, 
administration of the drug amphotericin B, bleomycin
Direct extension of the Chemotherapy
pharmacologic action of 

Figure 10.6  Livedo reticularis in a 39-year-old woman with the drug
polyarteritis nodosa. 

Idiosyncrasy Succinylcholine, haloperidol, 
serotonin syndrome

Full blood count with differential and film
White blood cell count is often raised in infection 
although a low count may indicate specific pathogens 
or overwhelming infection. In patients on immune 
suppression or chemotherapy the white cell count 
should not be used as a marker of infection as it may 
be falsely raised or suppressed.
■	 Neutrophilia with band forms and toxic 

granulation suggest bacterial infection.
■

Figure 10.7 	 Neutropenia may be seen post chemotherapy or 
  Ischemic changes in the right second digit in a 

39-year-old woman with polyarteritis nodosa. with typhoid fever, brucellosis, severe sepsis or 
viral infection.

■	 A reactive lymphocytosis may be seen in acute 
is whether the radiographic changes are caused by viral illnesses, particularly infectious 
complicating infection or organizing pneumonia. mononucleosis when atypical lymphocytes may 

Fever is not a feature in patients with uncomplicated be present. It may also occur in tuberculosis, 
scleroderma. brucellosis, or in leukaemias and lymphomas.
Drug fever ■	 Lymphopaenia is common in viral infection 
Drugs can cause fever via several mechanisms (Table (influenza, dengue, HIV) and typhoid fever.

■
10.3). This is a diagnosis by exclusion. A rash is not 	 Eosinophilia is seen in hypersensitivity reactions 
always present nor eosinophilia. By definition the as well as invasive parasitic infections.
fever coincides with administration of the drug and Platelets
disappears when the drug is discontinued. The risk 
of developing drug fever increases with the number ■	 Thrombocytopaenia may be seen in malaria, 
of drugs prescribed especially in elderly patients, haemorrhagic fevers, meningococcal sepsis or 
patients with active HIV infection and patients with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) 
cystic fibrosis. associated with overwhelming infection.

■	 Thrombocytosis may occur as an acute response 
to inflammation or can occur in chronic 

Investigations for infectious causes  infections such as TB.

of fever A blood film or smear is used to look for parasites 
that may be present in the blood. The commonest of 

Testing for infectious disease should include both this is malaria, but can also be used to detect babesia, 
laboratory and radiological investigations. trypanosomiasis or microfilaria. It may suggest Epstein-

Barr virus (EBV) if atypical lymphocytes are seen.

Laboratory Inflammatory markers
Both routine and specialist tests should be performed Acute-phase reactants (APRs) are a heterogeneous 
in the haematology, chemistry, microbiology and group of plasma proteins that increase or decrease 
virology laboratory where appropriate. in response to inflammatory stimuli such as infections, 



154 10 Patients with a fever ﻿
trauma, arthritis, autoimmune disorders and malignan- Sample any fluid that represents the possible site 
cies. The levels of APRs rise and fall in response to of infection as follows:
the rise and fall of the inflammatory process. Common 1	 Urine
tests used for this purpose include C-reactive protein •	 Dip, culture and microscopy for lower or 
(CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and upper urinary tract infection and 
more recently procalcitonin (PCT). ESR is an indirect urogenital infections
APR as it measures the rate of movement of red •	 Molecular tests for urogenital infections
blood cells, which is increased by binding of an APR. •	 Urine antigen testing for Legionella and 
Most APRs are produced in the liver. Streptococcus pneumoniae in cases of 

The ESR rises fairly rapidly (within 24-48 hours) community-acquired pneumonia
from the onset of inflammation and is slow to fall 2	 Urethral, vaginal and cervical swabs for 
once the cause of inflammation resolves. It has a low urogenital infections
sensitivity for infection and is affected by many factors •	 Culture and microscopy for lower or 
including age, gender, weight and renal function. upper urinary tract infection and 
Despite this, an ESR over 100 mm/hour warrants urogenital infections
further investigation. •	 Molecular tests for urogenital infections

CRP is a more sensitive marker of inflammation 3	 Cerebrospinal, peritoneal, joint and pleural 
than ESR and is less affected by external factors such fluid, biopsy tissue, sputum and 
as age and gender. It rises more rapidly (within bronchoalvelolar lavage
6-24 hours) and is quicker to fall than ESR. Very •	 Microscopy, culture and sensitivity for 
high levels of CRP are more likely to be associated bacterial and fungal infection
with bacterial infection than other causes of •	 Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining and culture 
inflammation. for acid-fast bacilli for diagnosis of TB

Procalcitonin has several advantages over both ESR •	 Molecular tests for viral pathogens
and CRP. It rises within 3-4 hours, quicker than either 4	 Stool
ESR or CRP, and a result can be obtained in 30 •	 Culture and sensitivity for bacterial infection
minutes or less using a semiquantitative point-of-care •	 Microscopy for parasites
test. It is more sensitive a marker of bacterial infection •	 Molecular tests for viral pathogens
as raised PCT levels are not seen in other non- 5	 Pus and tissue samples from abscesses, 
infectious inflammatory conditions, and viral infections surgical debridement, biopsies and wound 
tend to inhibit PCT rather than raise it. It can, infections
however, be raised in invasive fungal infection, malaria, •	 Microscopy, culture and sensitivity for 
by massive trauma such as severe burns or major bacterial and fungal infection
surgery, any therapy that stimulates cytokines such •	 ZN staining and culture for acid-fast bacilli 
as T-cell antibody therapy, granulocyte transfusion or for diagnosis of TB
graft-versus-host disease.

The usefulness of the above tests may differ depend- Serology
ing on the situation and site of infection. This is used mainly in the diagnosis of viral infections. 

A positive IgM usually indicates current or recent 
Basic biochemistry tests infection and a positive IgG indicates a previous infection 
Renal and liver function tests are useful in determining or vaccination. The following are common serology 
the presence of any renal or hepatic impairment, tests used in the diagnosis of infectious diseases:
which may assist in determining severity of disease Rash diseases: Measles, rubella, parvovirus, 
and affect antimicrobial dosing. Abnormal liver func- varicella, rickettsia, typhus, syphilis
tion tests may also assist in diagnosis of gastrointestinal Gastrointestinal infection: Viral hepatitis, 
infections such as hepatitis or cholecystitis. cytomegalovirus (CMV), amoebic liver abscess

Systemic infections: HIV, Lyme, dengue, 
brucellosis, leptospirosis

Microbiology and virology tests
The type of samples sent will depend on the site of Molecular diagnostics
infection identified. A few examples are listed below. This diagnostic platform is used mainly in the diagnosis 
Blood cultures should be taken if you suspect the of viral infections but is increasingly used for bacterial, 

patient may have bacteraemia from any source. fungal and parasitic infections. It is a rapid and 
The signs of sepsis, severe sepsis or septic shock sensitive technique and is not affected by previous 
should be used to indicate the need to take antibiotic treatment or the inability to culture the 
these cultures. If possible, two sets should be pathogen. Most sample types can be used for molecu-
taken aseptically prior to any antibiotic  lar diagnostics. It is used routinely to diagnose viral 
therapy. infections such as gastroenteritis, respiratory tract 

Bone marrow cultures may be more useful than infections, central nervous system infections and viral 
blood cultures for some intracellular pathogens. haemorrhagic fevers. Bacterial infections commonly 



SECTION Two
155

Patients with a fever ﻿

Box 10.6  Common disease presenting atypically Box 10.7  Uncommon disease presenting typically
Bacterial Bacterial
Abscesses (dental, subphrenic, liver, ovarian, prostate) Brucella Bartonella
Vascular infections Atypical mycobacteria Borrelia
Extrapulmonary TB, atypical mycobacteria HACEK organisms* Leptospirosis
Protected sites Nocardia Actinomycosis

–	 Sinuses/Ears Viral
–	 Heart HIV Hepatitis D & E
–	 Prostate/Ovaries EBV, CMV Viral haemorrhagic fever
–	 Bone, joint, intervertebral disc
–	 Thyroid Fungal

Partially treated infections Cryptococcus Histoplasmosis

Viral Protozoal
Immune compromised host Malaria Amoebiasis

Partial immunity Trypanosomiasis Leishmaniasis
Schistosomiasis Toxoplasmosis

Fungal Rickettsial
Immune compromised host Q fever
Protozoal and rickettsial Mycoplasmas
Travel history *HACEK includes Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Haemophilus aphrophilus, 

Actinobacillus, actinomycetemcomitans, Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella 
corrodens, and Kingella kingae

diagnosed in this way include pertussis, meningococcal 
disease and tuberculosis.

unknown. This is termed a PUO or pyrexia of 
Immunological tests unknown origin. The classic definition of a PUO is 
Systemic lupus erythematosus is defined by the a fever of >38.3°C for >2 weeks during which time 
presence of autoantibodies. Antinuclear and double- there has been at least:
stranded antibodies, antibodies to the extractable ■	 Three separate outpatient appointments, OR
nuclear antigens and complement 3 and 4 need to ■	 3 days in hospital, OR
be tested. The predictive value of ANCA testing ■	 1 weeks’ worth of appropriate and thorough 
depends on the clinical presentation of the patient investigation
and the laboratory performing the test. It is best that Infections account for 40% of cases of PUO. Causes 
all reasonable attempts to confirm clinical suspicions of a PUO often fall into one of two categories:
of systemic vasculitis with histopathological proof 1	 A common disease presenting in an atypical 
should be undertaken before treating the patient way
with potentially toxic medications. 2	 An uncommon disease presenting typically

A common disease presenting in an atypical way 
Histopathology requires more thought about the less common sites of 
Biopsy and staining of lymph nodes, tissue, fluid or infection, acquiring samples from more protected sites, 
bone marrow may reveal infectious structures such consideration of testing in the immune compromised 
as caseating granulomas, acid-fast bacilli, protozoal and the possibility of partially treated infections. (See 
cysts, fungal hyphae or spores. Boxes 10.6 and 10.7 for examples.)

An uncommon disease presenting in a typical 
Radiology manner requires thought about travel, occupation, 
Imaging studies may help to elucidate the source and pets, hobbies, habits and any other unusual activity 
extent of infection in those with a fever and localised that may present an infection risk.
site. All modalities of imaging have a role in diagnosis Non-infectious causes of a PUO need to be 
with the indications for X-rays, ultrasound, CT scan, considered and include neoplasms, autoimmune 
MRI, radionucleotide or PET scan, depending on the syndromes, granulomatous diseases, drug fevers 
site of infection being investigated. and other miscellaneous causes such as haematomas, 

brain lesions, hyperthyroidism, tissue ischaemia or 
infarction.

Pyrexia of unknown origin A thorough history, examination and investigations, 
as described above, should be performed on all patients 

Despite an adequate history, examination and set of with pyrexia of unknown origin, and the examination 
investigations, the cause of some fevers remains repeated from time to time.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION TWO
ASSESSMENT IN PARTICULAR GROUPS

Patients in pain 11 
Richard M. Langford and Shankar Ramaswamy

Introduction be challenging because the pain syndrome may be 
of mixed aetiology rather than fit a single category.

Pain is a familiar phenomenon which is part of our Pain is commonly classified according to the 
everyday life and is a feature of various diseases. It following:

■
most commonly accompanies an injury, where it 	 Aetiology and underlying condition

■
serves its most important purpose, namely, to protect 	 Mechanism

■
us, alert us and make us remove ourselves from danger. 	 Duration
It can possibly trigger a spinal withdrawal reflex (Fig. 
11.1). Both congenital insensitivity to pain and Aetiology/underlying condition
extreme sensitivity to pain (paroxysmal extreme pain ■	 Trauma – an acute response to an injury
disorder and erythromelalgia) are rare genetic condi- ■	 Surgery
tions which are disabling and shorten life span, ■	 Medical illness such as myocardial infarction or 
highlighting the importance of pain to our welfare appendicitis
and survival. The severity of pain, and its impact on ■	 Physiological conditions such as menstruation 
an individual, ranges from a trivial occurrence such and labour
as a needle-prick injury to a sensation of such intensity 
that it induces thoughts of suicide. Mechanism

■	 Inflammatory/Nociceptive – pain generated and 
Definition maintained by inflammatory mediators (such as 

prostaglandin E2), secondary to an ongoing 
The International Association for the Study of Pain disease process. Examples include inflammatory 
(IASP) proposed the following definition (1979): arthritis or mechanical back pain.
‘Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experi- ■	 Neuropathic – Neuropathic pain is generated in 
ence associated with actual or potential tissue damage malfunctioning nerves and is defined as ‘pain 
or described in terms of damage’. This definition has arising as a direct consequence of a lesion or 
important implications: pain is not necessarily or disease affecting the somatosensory system’. 
always associated with ongoing tissue damage; it is This type of pain has special clinical features as 
a subjective experience and has an emotional as well described below and may arise from injury or 
as a sensory component and is always unpleasant. dysfunction of the central or peripheral nervous 

Pain is notoriously difficult to describe. It is difficult system. Examples include painful diabetic 
to assess and even harder to quantify. Nevertheless, neuropathy and post-stroke pain.
pain assessment is crucial in order to evaluate its ■	 Mixed pain – This includes features of both 
impact on the sufferer and also to plan a treatment nociceptive and neuropathic pain, such as back 
strategy. It has been termed ‘the 5th vital sign’ and pain with radiculopathy (radiating leg pain due 
is mandated as part of routine assessment of patients to nerve irritation or compression).
in hospital. In 2004 the IASP declared that the relief ■	 Psychosomatic – Purely psychosomatic pain is 
of pain should be a human right. rare. However, pain, especially chronic pain, 

almost invariably has an emotional and 
behavioural component.

Classification of pain
Duration

There are many ways in which pain can be classified 
in order to formulate an optimal treatment strategy. ■	 Acute – most commonly a physiological 
Despite this, classifying a particular pain state can response to an injury. It resolves with the 



158 11 Patients in pain ﻿
‘Spinal withdrawal reflexes’ ‘Perceive unpleasant sensation’ Figure 11.1  Spinal withdrawal reflex with 
Rapid behavioural response Dominates attention pain. 

Modify behaviour

Pain ‘warning system’ essential for survival

disappearance of a noxious stimulus or within 
Individual factors

the time frame of a normal healing process. • Sex
■	 Chronic – it can either be associated with an • Age

ongoing pathological process, such as • Cognitive level
rheumatoid arthritis or malignancy, or be • Previous pains
present for longer than is consistent with a • Family learning
normal healing time. Pain is arbitrarily described • Culture

as chronic if it persists for longer than 3 months. 
Chronic pain is often associated with disability, 
mood and sleep disturbance and a significant 

NOXIOUS STIMULUS, PAIN
behavioural response. It is sometimes subdivided TISSUE DAMAGE SENSATION
into pain associated with cancer and pain 
associated with non-malignant conditions.

Situational factors Psychological factors
• Expectation • Fear

Mechanisms of pain • Control • Anger
• Relevance • Frustration

At its simplest, pain is generated by a noxious stimulus 
that excites the central nervous system. This mecha- Figure 11.2  Biopsychosocial model of pain. 
nism was first proposed by Descartes in the 16th 
century and conceptually still holds true, but it is 
crucial to appreciate that the final subjective experi- synapse. From the thalamus, third-order neurons 
ence of pain is shaped by various modulatory factors project to the somatosensory cortex, anterior cingulate 
(Fig. 11.2). gyrus and the insular cortex, where they terminate. 

A stimulus (which can be thermal, pressure or It is at this cortical level that a stimulus is perceived 
chemical) excites nociceptors and the resulting as pain (Fig. 11.3).
impulse is then transmitted to the spinal cord by two However, we now know that the noxious sensory 
different classes of nerve fibres, via the first-order input may be modulated at several levels in the spinal 
neurons located in the dorsal root ganglion (Fig. 11.3): cord and brain, thus altering the final pain experience. 
(i) faster, myelinated Aδ fibres and (ii) smaller, slower At the spinal level, the gate theory proposed by 
unmyelinated C fibres transmit the sensation to the Melzack and Wall in 1965 states that non-noxious 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord, where these primary stimulation of the large Aβ fibres inhibits the response 
afferents synapse in lamina I, lamina II (substantia to painful stimuli of neurons with wide dynamic 
gelatinosa), lamina IV and some in lamina V. All these range (WDR neurons, located primarily in lamina 
afferent sensory fibres are excitatory. Second-order V), reducing the input of small fibres mediating the 
fibres are then carried in the spinothalamic and sensation of pain. A good example of this effect is 
spinoreticular tracts to the thalamus, where they ‘rubbing it better’. In addition, descending input from 



SECTION Two
159

Patients in pain ﻿
Cingulate cortex

Somatosensory cortex

Thalamus Insular cortex

Amygdala

Periaqueductal grey

Parabrachial nucleus

Rostral ventral medulla
Brain stem

Nociceptor

Spinal cord

Figure 11.3  Pain pathway. 

higher centres (periaqueductal grey matter and rostral Unfortunately, no single standardized approach will 
ventral medulla) also modulate neural activity in the allow assessment of pain in every situation. Pain is 
spinal cord, reducing or enhancing pain sensation. essentially a subjective experience. Therefore, what 
Such descending input is one of the mechanisms by the patient describes as his experience is of paramount 
which emotional and cognitive factors modulate pain importance. As in most areas of medicine, the history 
perception. Much remains to be understood about is the most useful tool in assessment and diagnosis.
the central pathophysiology of pain.

In recent years, pain management has increasingly History
adopted a biopsychosocial model. This has highlighted 
the need to take into account the interactions between Taking a history from a patient in pain is more 
biological, psychological and social factors leading to complex than recording symptoms and making a 
an individual’s emergent pain experience. diagnosis. Even in acute pain states, where pain 

represents a protective function and is a symptom 
of an injury, approaching the patient as a whole and 

The patient in pain bearing in mind the overall context, emotional, 
cognitive and behavioural aspects is crucial for optimis-

As with any other branch of medicine, careful and ing the treatment strategy.
meticulous assessment of a patient’s symptoms and The first step is to evaluate the pain and thereby 
signs is fundamental. Two key questions should be try to understand its underlying mechanisms. This 
considered when dealing with a patient in pain: process is described in Boxes 11.1 and 11.2 and Tables 
■	 Is the pain a symptom of ongoing tissue damage 11.1 and 11.2.

or of another condition that needs to be dealt 
with by another medical professional? Examination

■	 What is the optimal treatment strategy: to 
either abolish the pain altogether or reduce it to The purpose of examination as part of pain evaluation 
a more bearable level? is described in Box 11.3.



160 11 Patients in pain ﻿

Box 11.1  Scheme for evaluating history associated with pain
■	 The site of pain – this may give a clue to the underlying ■	 Evaluation of psychosocial elements also known as ‘yellow 

pathology. flags’ (Box 11.2) – These are not life-threatening 
■	 Distribution – pain may follow a dermatomal or peripheral symptoms, but their presence means that the 

nerve distribution or have no relation to anatomical psychosocial history has special relevance. Major 
patterns. psychological illness should be addressed, along with 

■	 Character of pain – nociceptive (somatic or visceral) symptomatic relief of the pain, in the interim.
versus neuropathic (Table 11.1). ■	 Previous and current treatments and their impact

■	 Duration of pain – this may have a bearing on the level of ■	 Past medical history – Taking a full medical history must 
disability and psychosocial cost of the pain. not be overlooked. It may give invaluable clues as to the 

■	 Rapidity of onset and any precipitating factors – a rapid aetiology and pathogenesis of pain. For instance: history 
or relatively recent-onset pain syndrome is more likely to of recent herpes zoster (shingles) infection along with a 
follow a conventional medical model, whereby it is dermatomal distribution of neuropathic-type pain 
appropriate to search for an underlying cause. Chronic (confirmed on examination with a residual, typical rash, 
pain requires a more biopsychosocial approach. allodynia and hypoalgesia/hyperalgesia) will suggest a 

■	 Severity of pain and its change over time – this requires diagnosis of postherpetic neuralgia. Certain common 
a consistent method for measuring pain (see below). illnesses associated with neuropathic pain are listed in 

■	 Alleviating and exacerbating/aggravating factors – these Table 11.2.
may support a better understanding of mechanisms that ■	 Impact of pain – consider the effect of pain on the 
sustain the pain. patient’s activity, ability to work, mood, sleep, 

■	 Exclusion of more sinister pathology – ‘red flags’. relationships etc.
Important conditions not to be missed include pain ■	 Psychosocial history – The psychosocial assessment of 
related to underlying (or undiagnosed) cancer, pain pain should be directed at finding out the psychological 
related to inflammation (such as rheumatoid arthritis) setting of the pain, particularly mood. It should explore 
and pain related to other serious medical/surgical the patient’s beliefs and expectations. Generally speaking 
conditions requiring emergency treatment such as cauda this is more relevant in chronic pain states, because 
equina syndrome due to spinal cord compression. acute pain usually resolves quickly.

Box 11.2  Psychosocial aspects of pain Box 11.3  The purpose of examination as part of  
pain evaluation

Pain is described as having at least five dimensions, each 
of which should be addressed: ■	 To elucidate and evaluate any physical signs associated 
■	 The sensation of pain – the subjective experience with a particular painful condition
■	 Suffering and distress – the emotional component ■	 To reassure the patient that pain does not imply any 
■	 Expectations and beliefs – the cognitive component ongoing damage
■	 Verbal (complaints) or non-verbal communication – the ■	 To define baseline parameters and monitor their change 

behavioural component (illness behaviour) is the way in over time
which the patient responds to and expresses the ■	 To understand the mechanisms which generate and 
sensation of pain which is influenced by various cultural sustain the pain, in particular to identify neuropathic 
and social factors elements

■	 Impact of social environment

Table 11.1  Nociceptive versus neuropathic pain
Nociceptive Neuropathic

Description of pain Aching, localized, toothache-like, Shooting, radiating, stabbing, burning, electric shock-like
sharp, squeezing

Movement impact Associated with movement Independent
Physical examination Normal response Allodynia, hyperalgesia, vasomotor changes
Examples Injury, postoperative pain Peripheral neuropathies, shingles, cancer pain
Treatment strategies More classical approach, More biopsychological approach, conventional analgesics 

conventional analgesics +/− non-conventional (antidepressants, anticonvulsants etc.)



SECTION Two
161

Patients in pain ﻿

Table 11.2  Common illnesses associated with chronic pain
Illness Nature of pain disorder
Diabetes Diabetic neuropathy – Commonly glove and stocking peripheral neuropathic pain
Connective tissue disorder Variable presentation of accompanying neuropathy
HIV Neuropathy due to disease as well as due to antiretroviral drugs
Trauma Multifactorial aethiology – Associated nerve injury causing neuropathy and or complex 

regional pain syndrome
Herpes zoster infection Post-herpetic neuralgia – Neuropathic pain with dermatomal distribution
Multiple sclerosis Central neuropathic pain including trigeminal neuralgia
Cerebrovascular accident Post-stroke central neuropathic pain
Fibromyalgia Neuropathic type musculoskeletal pain, usually primary but could be secondary to other 

disorders such connective tissue disease
Complex regional pain syndrome Most likely due to previous injury – Usually neuropathic pain of the extremities
Chronic post surgical pain Variable incidence following variety of surgeries causing neuropathic pain
Degenerative bone and joint disease Variable sites – Mostly nociceptive but with possible neuropathic component
Phantom limb pain Neuropathic pain following amputation most commonly of extremities
Cancer Cancer and its treatment such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy cause chronic pain 

with neuropathic and/or nociceptive features.

Detailed examination will focus on different systems Investigation
according to a particular pain condition. It may involve 
basic orthopaedic, neurological or surgical examina- Investigation of a patient in pain is tailored to the 
tion. Regardless of the approach, it should follow individual’s presentation. It serves three important 
conventional basic methods: inspection, palpation goals:
and range of movement where appropriate. For ■	 To exclude more sinister pathology
example, a patient who presents with back pain will ■	 To provide diagnostic clues
require at least inspection to check for muscle spasm, ■	 To arrive at an optimal management strategy
posture, deformity, gait and use of aids such as crutches The commonest investigation employed by pain 
and evidence of previous surgery; palpation of para- specialists is imaging, for example using simple X-rays 
vertebral and bony areas; and range of movement to to exclude a pathological fracture, MRI to demonstrate 
evaluate any restriction. The examination will also changes within the central nervous system or an 
need to include a neurological examination looking ultrasound examination of the abdomen. Neurophysi-
at dermatomal sensory dysfunction (suggesting ological (EMG) studies are helpful to determine the 
radiculopathy) and particular tests (depending on presence and extent of any nerve damage, and various 
the region of the spine) to detect signs of nerve root blood tests may be used to determine, for example, 
irritation using stretch tests such as Lasègue’s test the activity of rheumatoid arthritis. Any test used 
(or straight leg raising test) for low back pain; and must be considered only as a part of a more global 
for the neck, the Spurling test (turning the patient’s approach, never in isolation. Some tests such as 
head to the affected side while extending and applying Quantitative Sensory Testing and functional imaging 
downward pressure to the top of the patient’s head using PET-CT or fMRI are used in the research setting 
– a positive test is indicated by pain arising in the to understand more about the underlying pain 
neck radiating in the direction of the ipsilateral cor- mechanisms.
responding dermatome). The examination should By the end of the assessment, any pathology that 
also assess glove and stocking sensory loss (charac- needs to be dealt with by the relevant medical profes-
teristic of peripheral neuropathy), reflexes and plantar sional should be identified, either for urgent manage-
response, muscle power, sensation and reflexes. ment, if ‘red flags’ are elicited, or electively.

As part of the clinical examination it is important 
to elicit features of neuropathic pain such as allodynia Difficult cases
(pain due to a stimulus that does not usually provoke 
pain, for example a light touch using cotton wool As the history is the key to pain assessment and 
eliciting pain) and hyperalgesia or hypoalgesia treatment, it is clear that communication is paramount. 
(increased or decreased pain, respectively, from a Difficulty arises if there is a language barrier between 
stimulus such as pressure or pinprick that usually the physician and the patient, if the patient is a young 
provokes pain). child or has learning difficulties, confusion or dementia. 



162 11 Patients in pain ﻿
It is important as a physician to understand that the unidimensional or multidimensional, with the latter 
pain a patient perceives could be influenced by social being more useful in chronic pain conditions.
and cultural factors as well as past experience. The 
pain may prove refractory to treatment, with all Unidimensional scales
treatment options already exhausted, which again 
can pose a challenging situation, necessitating a change Unidimensional scales are very commonly used 
in goal setting. particularly in acute pain. They are simple, sensitive, 

reproducible and quickly applied and give a numerical 
Measuring pain value to the pain severity. They can be either analogue 

or discrete. The latter may be numerical or verbal.
Pain is a subjective experience and therefore difficult The most common of these scales is the Visual 
to quantify. However, being able to quantify pain Analogue Scale (VAS): the patient is given a horizontal 
will aid management by assessing severity and allowing line 10 cm long with ‘no pain’ on the left-hand 
the measurement of treatment or intervention effect side and ‘worst possible pain’ on the right and is 
and is crucial in research studies looking at new asked to mark the line according to the severity of 
treatment modalities. Measurement tools may be the pain.

I. Pain Rating Index (PRI):
 The words below describe average pain. Place a check mark (     ) in the column
 that represents the degree to which you feel that type of pain. Please limit
 yourself to a description of the pain in your pelvic area only:

None Mild Moderate Severe
Throbbing 0 1 2 3
Shooting 0 1 2 3
Stabbing 0 1 2 3
Sharp 0 1 2 3
Cramping 0 1 2 3

a Gnawing 0 1 2 3
Hot-Burning 0 1 2 3
Aching 0 1 2 3
Heavy 0 1 2 3
Tender 0 1 2 3
Splitting 0 1 2 3
Tiring-Exhausting 0 1 2 3
Sickening 0 1 2 3

b
Fearful 0 1 2 3
Punishing-Cruel 0 1 2 3

II. Present Pain Intensity (PPI)–Visual Analog Scale (VAS). Tick along scale below for pelvic pain:
No Pain Worst possible pain

III. Evaluative overall intensity of total pain experience. Please limit yourself to a
 description of the pain in your pelvic area only. Place a check mark (     ) in the
 appropriate column:

Evaluation
0 No pain
1 Mild
2 Discomforting
3 Distressing
4 Horrible
5 Excruciating

IV. Scoring
Score

I-a S-PRI (Sensory Pain Rating Index)
I-b A-PRI (Affective Pain Rating Index)
I-a+b T-PRI (Total Pain Rating Index)
II PPI-VAS (Present Pain Intensity-Visual Analog Scale)
III Evaluative overall intensity of total pain experience

Figure 11.4  Short form McGill Pain Questionnaire. 



SECTION Two
163

Patients in pain ﻿
The numerical rating scale: the patient is asked to 

assign a number from 0 to 10 to his pain, 0 being Strong opioid

no pain at all and 10 being the worst imaginable e.g. morphine, hydromorphine, oxycodone,
pain. In the verbal rating scale the patient rates his        buprenorphine, fentanyl, methadone

pain into one of the following categories: none, mild, 
moderate or severe.

Multidimensional (complex) scales Weak opioid
e.g. codeine, dihydrocodeine, tramadol

The development of multidimensional scales acknowl-
edges the multidimensional impacts of pain on a 
sufferer’s life. Common scales used include the McGill 
Questionnaire and Brief Pain Inventory. The original 
McGill Questionnaire assesses various aspects of pain, Non-opioid
including sensory qualities of pain, affective qualities e.g. aspirin, ibuprofen, diclofenac, COX-2 inhibitors,
(tension, fear etc.) and has evaluative words that        paracetamol
describe the subjective intensity of the total pain 
experienced. There are various measurements derived 
from the data, but a short form of the McGill 
Questionnaire is most often used (Fig. 11.4). It is •  The World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines advocate that
easy to apply and reproducible.     when pain occurs, there should be prompt oral administration

To build up a complete assessment of a patient     of drugs, administered in accordance with steps 1–3.

with longstanding disabling pain, a battery of measure- •  To maintain freedom from pain, drugs should be taken 
ment tools may be required which may include anxiety    ‘by the clock’ every 3–6 hours, rather than ‘on demand’ and

and depression measurement scales, catastrophising     each patient should receive tailored pain management.

scales and disability index. •  This 3-step approach of administering the right drug in the

To assess for neuropathic pain, recently introduced     right dose at the right time is inexpensive and 80–90% effective.

and validated tools such as the ‘painDETECT’ and Figure 11.5  WHO pain ladder. 
‘LANSS’ questionnaires are used to look for specific 
features pertaining to neuropathic pain.

pain, but medications can be less effective. In particular 
Treatment strategies there should be less emphasis on the use of strong 

opioids in chronic pain, as they become less effective 
Acute pain and are associated with significant short-term as well 
Acute pain management should be directed to the as long-term side effects. The British Pain Society 
treatment of the underlying cause as well as symp- guidelines on the use of opioids for persistent pain 
tomatic pain relief itself. For example fractures should recommend a maximum dose of 120 mg morphine-
be reduced and immobilized and infections treated equivalent dosage per 24 hours in the non-specialist 
with antibiotics. Pain in the acute setting as well as setting. Chronic pain often has a neuropathic com-
that due to cancer is then treated symptomatically ponent, which is treated with antineuropathic agents 
with analgesic drugs in accordance with the World including antidepressants such as amitriptyline and 
Health Organization (WHO) pain ladder (Fig. 11.5). anticonvulsants such as gabapentin and pregabalin.
Pharmacological options include simple analgesics Non-pharmacological options
such as paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs and opioids. There is also an option for consider- The non-pharmacological management of chronic 
ing local anaesthetic nerve blocks especially for pain pain is multidisciplinary and is usually available only 
following surgery and trauma. It is increasingly rec- through specialized pain clinics. A detailed discussion 
ognized that poorly treated acute pain can result in is beyond the scope of this chapter but pain manage-
a chronic pain state which can become quite refractory ment may include interventional techniques such as 
to treatment. spinal injections (such as with steroids), radiofrequency 

therapy and neuromodulation, acupuncture and 
Chronic pain transcutaneous nerve stimulation and also involve 

physiotherapy, occupational therapy and psychological 
In chronic pain the emphasis shifts from management techniques. The aim is to provide physical and psy-
of the pain itself to addressing its psychosocial sequelae chological rehabilitation leading, where possible, to 
as well as improving the patient’s function. This often patient self-management. As the presence of chronic 
involves a multimodal treatment approach under the pain can be considered a long-term illness or a disease, 
umbrella of a biopsychosocial model. The pharma- the goal for treatment is to attain a good functional 
cological options include the same as that for acute outcome rather than being pain free.

Step 1

Step 2

Step 3



164 11 Patients in pain ﻿

Conclusions looking at its social and psychological consequences 
as well as its sensory characteristics. With wide inter-

Pain is complex and essentially a patient-reported, patient variability, perhaps more than with any other 
subjective phenomenon. Pain assessment includes symptom, management must be individualized to 
unidimensional and also multidimensional tools the context and needs of each patient.



SECTION 3
Basic systems
	 12.	 Respiratory system
	 13.	 Cardiovascular system
	 14.	 Gastrointestinal system
	 15.	 Locomotor system
	 16.	 Nervous system
	 17.	 Urogenital system
	 18.	 Endocrine and metabolic disorders
	 19.	 Skin, nails and hair
	 20.	 Eyes
	 21.	 Ear, nose and throat



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Respiratory system 12 
Veronica L.C. White

Introduction to asthma is very often worse at night and in the 
early morning. By contrast, people with predominantly 

Diseases of the respiratory system account for up to irreversible airways obstruction due to chronic obstruc-
a third of deaths in most countries and for a major tive pulmonary disease (COPD) will often say that 
proportion of visits to the doctor and time away from as long as they are sitting in bed, they feel quite 
work or school. As with every aspect of diagnosis in normal; it is exercise that troubles them.
medicine, the key to success is a clear and carefully 
recorded history; symptoms may be trivial or extremely Cough
distressing, but either may indicate serious and life- The symptom of cough can be short lived or last 
threatening disease. years; cough can be defined as acute (lasting less than 

3 weeks) or chronic (lasting more than 8 weeks) 
(Box 12.3). A cough may be dry or it may be produc-

The history tive with sputum. Acute cough is most commonly 
caused by recent infection, either viral or bacterial; 

Most patients with respiratory disease will present however, any cough that is associated with haemop-
with breathlessness, cough, excess sputum, haemop- tysis should be a cause for concern, prompt appropri-
tysis, wheeze or chest pain. ate assessment and a baseline chest X-ray (CXR) at 

the very least. Any patient with a chronic cough, i.e. 
Breathlessness one that lasts more than 8 weeks, should be sent for 

a CXR and spirometry as baseline investigations (Box 
Everyone becomes breathless on strenuous exertion. 12.4). Discussion about cough should include:
Breathlessness inappropriate to the level of physical ■	 How long has the cough been present? A cough 
exertion, or even occurring at rest, is called dyspnoea. lasting a few days following a cold has less 
Its mechanisms are complex and not fully understood. significance than one lasting several weeks in a 
It is not due simply to a lowered blood oxygen tension middle-aged smoker, which may be the first sign 
(hypoxia) or to a raised blood carbon dioxide tension of a malignancy.
(hypercapnia), although these may play a significant ■	 Is the cough worse at any time of day or night? 
part. People with cardiac disease (see Ch. 13) and A dry cough at night may be an early symptom 
even non-cardiorespiratory conditions such as anaemia, of asthma, as may a cough that comes in spasms 
thyrotoxicosis or metabolic acidosis may become lasting several minutes.
dyspnoeic as well as those with primarily respiratory ■	 Is the cough aggravated by anything, for 
problems (Box 12.1). example allergic triggers such as dust, animals 

An important assessment is whether the dyspnoea or pollen, or non-specific triggers such as 
is related only to exertion and how far the patient exercise or cold air? The increased reactivity of 
can walk at a normal pace on the level (exercise the airways seen in asthma and in some normal 
tolerance). This may take some skill to elicit, as few people for several weeks after viral respiratory 
people note their symptoms in this form, but a brief infections may present in this way. Severe 
discussion about what they can do in their daily coughing, whatever its cause, may be followed 
lives usually gives a good estimate of their mobility by vomiting (Box 12.5).
(Box 12.2).

Other clarifications will include whether there is 
variability in the symptoms, whether there are good Sputum
days and bad days and, very importantly, whether ■	 Is sputum produced?
there are any times of day or night that are usually ■	 What does it look like? Children and some 
worse than others. Variable airways obstruction due adults swallow sputum, but it is always worth 



168 12 Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.1  Causes of breathlessness Box 12.3  Causes of cough

Acute Subacute Chronic Causes of cough Examples
Airways Pneumonia COPD Respiratory Viral or bacterial infection, 
obstruction bronchospasm, COPD, non 
Anaphylaxis Exacerbation Pleural effusion asthmatic eosinophilic asthma, 

of COPD bronchiolitis, malignancy, 
Asthma Angina Malignancy parenchymal disease e.g. ILD, 
Pneumothorax Cardiac Chronic pulmonary bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, 

tamponade emboli sarcoidosis, pleural disease, 
Pulmonary Metabolic Restrictive lung aspiration
embolus acidosis disorders, including Upper airways disease Post nasal drip, sinusitis, 

interstitial lung disease inhaled foreign body, tonsillar 
Myocardial Pain Congestive cardiac enlargement
infarction failure Cardiovascular disease LVF, mitral stenosis
Pulmonary Pontine Valvular dysfunction Gastro-oesophageal GORD
oedema haemorrhage disease
Arrhythmias Cardiomyopathy Neurological disease Aspiration
Anxiety Diastolic dysfunction Drugs and irritants ACE inhibitors, cigarette smoke

Pulmonary hypertension ACE, angiotensin converting enzyme; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary 
Anaemia disease; ILD, interstitial lung disease; LVF, left ventricular failure; GORD, 

gastro-oesophageal reflux disease – also associated with laryngopharyngeal 
Neuromuscular disorders reflux (LPR)
Deconditioning
Obesity

COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Box 12.4  Five most common causes of chronic cough 
with a normal CXR

■	 Post viral upper respiratory tract infection (URTI)
■	 Smoking

Box 12.2  Medical Research Council grading of dyspnoea 
■	 Asthma – including cough variant asthma and 

(breathlessness scale) non-asthmatic eosinophilic asthma
1	 Not troubled by breathlessness except on strenuous ■	 Post nasal drip (hay fever)

exercise. ■	 Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD)
2	 Short of breath when hurrying or walking up a slight hill.
3	 Walks slower than contemporaries on the level because 

of breathlessness, or has to stop for breath when Box 12.5  Important questions in the history of  
walking at own pace. chronic cough

4	 Stops for breath after about 100 m or after a few 
■

minutes on the level. 	 Have you had a recent cold, sore throat or viral 
5	 Too breathless to leave the house, or breathless when infection?

■
dressing or undressing. 	 Do you have a history of asthma, nocturnal cough or 

wheeze?
■	 Do you experience nasal discharge or sinusitis?
■	 Do you suffer from acid reflux, indigestion or coughing 

asking for a description of its colour and after meals?
■

consistency. Yellow or green sputum is usually 	 What time of day is the cough worse?
■

purulent. People with asthma may produce 	 Do you smoke?
■

small amounts of very thick or jelly-like 	 Are you breathless?
■

sputum, sometimes in the shape of a cast of the 	 Have you coughed up blood?
■

airways. Eosinophils may accumulate in the 	 Do you have a hoarse voice?
■

sputum in asthma, causing a purulent 	 Have you had fevers or night sweats?
■

appearance even when no infection is present. 	 Have you lost weight?
■

■	 How much is produced? When severe lung 	 Are you getting chest pain?
damage in infancy and childhood was common, 
bronchiectasis was often found in adults. The 
amount of sputum produced daily often Haemoptysis
exceeded a cupful. Bronchiectasis is now rare, Haemoptysis means the coughing up of blood in the 
and chronic bronchitis causes the production of sputum. It should never be dismissed without very 
smaller amounts of sputum. careful evaluation of the patient. The potentially 



SECTION Three
169

Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.6  Causes of haemoptysis caused by lung disease usually arises from the pleura. 
Pleuritic pain is sharp and stabbing and is made worse 

■	 Malignancy and benign lung tumours, including lung by deep breathing or coughing. It occurs when the 
metastasis pleura is inflamed, most commonly by infection in 

■	 Pulmonary infection including bacterial pneumonia, the underlying lung. More constant pain, unrelated 
tuberculosis (TB), lung abscesses and fungal infection to breathing, may be caused by local invasion of the 

■	 Bronchiectasis including cystic fibrosis chest wall by a lung or pleural tumour.
■	 Pulmonary emboli A spontaneous pneumothorax causes pain which 
■	 Congestive heart failure is worse on breathing but which may have more of 
■	 Pulmonary fibrosis an aching character than the stabbing pain of pleurisy. 
■	 Pulmonary vasculitis If a pulmonary embolus causes infarction of the lung, 
■	 Severe pulmonary hypertension pleurisy and hence pleuritic pain may occur, but an 
■	 AV malformation acute pulmonary embolus can also cause pain which 
■	 Chest trauma and foreign bodies is not stabbing in nature. A large pulmonary embolus 
■	 Endometriosis causing haemodynamic disturbance may cause cardiac-
■	 Anticoagulation or coagulopathy type chest pain.
■	 Drugs, e.g. cocaine, thrombolytics

Other symptoms
Quite apart from the common symptoms of respira-
tory disease, there are some other aspects of the 

serious significance of blood in the sputum is well history that are particularly relevant to the respiratory 
known, and fear often leads patients not to mention system.
it: a specific question is always necessary, as well as 
an attempt to decide if it is fresh or altered blood, Upper airway
how much is produced, when it started and how Questions related to the ear, nose and throat are 
often it happens (Box 12.6). relevant. Rhinosinusitis often coexists with asthma 

Blood may be coughed up alone, or sputum may or less commonly, bronchiectasis, and can be an 
be bloodstained. It is sometimes difficult for the aggravating factor. A common cause of chronic cough 
patient to describe whether or not the blood has is postnasal drip secondary to rhinitis. A change in 
originated from the chest or whether it comes from the voice may indicate involvement of the left recur-
the gums or nose or even from the stomach. Patients rent laryngeal nerve by a carcinoma of the lung. 
should always be asked about associated conditions Sometimes patients using inhaled corticosteroids for 
such as epistaxis (nose bleeds) or the subsequent asthma develop oropharyngeal candidiasis or even 
development of melaena (altered blood in the stool), hoarseness or weakness of the voice, which improves 
which occurs in the case of upper gastrointestinal on changing the treatment. Do not ascribe hoarseness 
bleeding. Usually, however, it is clear that the blood to this cause in older patients, as carcinoma of the 
originates from the chest, and this is an indication vocal cords can also be present with hoarseness or a 
for further investigation. change in the quality of the voice. Laryngoscopy is 

always indicated if hoarseness persists for more than 
Wheezing 4 weeks.
Always ask whether the patient hears any noises The smoking and recreational drug history
coming from the chest. Even if a wheeze is not present 
when you examine the patient, it is useful to know Always take a full smoking and recreational drug 
that he has noticed it on occasions. Sometimes wheez- history. Do so in a sympathetic and non-judgemental 
ing will have been noticed by others (especially by way, or the detail is unlikely to be accurate. The time 
a partner at night, when asthma is worse) but not for advice about smoking cessation is after completion 
by the patient. of your assessment, not at the outset. Simply asking 

Sometimes stridor (see Ch. 21) may be mistaken ‘Do you smoke?’ is not enough. Novices will be 
for wheezing by both patient and doctor. This serious astonished at how often closer probing of the answer 
finding usually indicates narrowing of the larynx, ‘no’ reveals that the patient gave it up yesterday or 
trachea or main bronchi. It is also not unusual for that he states his intention of doing so from the time 
patients with a pneumothorax to describe ‘rubbing’ of your consultation. Age of starting and stopping if 
or ‘gurgling’ sounds in their chest which may well an ex-smoker and average consumption for both 
be due to the displaced lung. current and ex-smokers are the bare minimum 

information needed.
Pain in the chest Identification of an individual as a current or ex-

smoker will greatly influence the interpretation you 
Apart from musculoskeletal aches and pains conse- place on your findings upon history and examination. 
quent upon prolonged bouts of coughing, chest pain Almost all cases of lung cancer and chronic obstructive 



170 12 Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.7  List of common occupations that may be Box 12.8  List of activities that may lead to  
associated with asthma asbestos exposure

■	 Car paint sprayers – isocyanates ■	 Mining and manufacture of asbestos
■	 Electricians – colophony ■	 Shipbuilding and aircraft manufacturing
■	 Woodworkers ■	 Dock and rail workers – unloading asbestos from  
■	 Rubber and plastic industries ships/trains
■	 Bakers – flour dust and enzymes, e.g. amylase ■	 Thermal and fire insulation – lagging
■	 Working with animals – vets, zoo keepers, laboratory ■	 Construction, building repair and demolition

worker – rodent urinary proteins ■	 Plumbers and gas fitters
■	 Working with agriculture – farmers, fish worker ■	 Car mechanics (brake linings)

– salmon proteins ■	 Electricians, carpenters, upholsterers
■	 Healthcare professionals – latex and diathermy ■	 Manufacture of gas masks in World War II
■	 Hairdressing – persulphate, henna ■	 Family member of one of the above, and/or working or 
■	 Tea sifters and packers living near an asbestos source (particularly if asbestos 

fibres taken home on workers’ clothing)

pulmonary disease (COPD) occur in those who have As far as the occupational history is concerned, the 
smoked. best way to proceed is chronologically. Most people 

Recreational drug use tends to be commoner in cannot randomly remember, for example, what they 
younger people, but do not assume that this is the might have been doing 20 years ago or indeed, if 
case and ask all patients from all walks of life. Again, asked in isolation, when they worked in a particular 
sounding sympathetic rather than judgemental is job. But if you start at the beginning of their life and 
crucial and a good opening line can be, ‘If you don’t work forward they find it much easier to remember 
mind me asking…’. Heroin, crack, cannabis and other (try it yourself starting with your school exams!)
drugs are smoked and in some cases cause more Start by asking the patient how old he was when 
damage to the lungs than tobacco. Cannabis can cause he left school, then what job or further education 
severe emphysema in younger patients, who are often he had; then ask him to continue through his life to 
unaware of effects. Use the consultation to discuss the present day. Particularly for those who went on 
its long-term sequelae. to further education, ask about holiday jobs (you 

might be surprised at their responses!) and it might 
The family history be worth asking if they travelled overseas with their 
There is a strong inherited susceptibility to asthma. employment, especially if they were in the armed 
Associated atopic conditions such as eczema and hay forces. Don’t assume that all 80-year-olds are retired 
fever may also be present in relatives of those with or indeed that all young patients are employed.
asthma, particularly in those who develop the condi-
tion when young. The examination
The occupational history
No other organ is as susceptible to the working General assessment
environment as much as the lungs. Several hundred An examination of the respiratory system is incom-
different substances have now been recognized as plete without a simultaneous general assessment (Box 
causing occupational asthma. Paint sprayers, workers 12.9). Watch the patient as he comes into the room, 
in the electronics, rubber or plastics industries and during your history taking and while he is undressing 
woodworkers are relatively commonly affected (Box and climbing on to the couch. If this is a hospital 
12.7). Always ask about a relationship between inpatient, is there breathlessness just on moving in 
symptoms and work. bed? A breathless patient may be using the accessory 

Damage from inhalation of asbestos may take muscles of respiration (e.g. sternomastoid) and, in 
decades to become manifest, most seriously as the presence of severe COPD, many patients find it 
malignant mesothelioma. In industrialized countries, easier to breathe out through pursed lips (Fig. 12.1).
this once extremely rare tumour of the pleura has ■	 Is there an audible wheeze or stridor?
become more common and will become even more ■	 Is the voice hoarse?
common in the next 20 years. In middle-aged individu- ■	 Is the patient continually coughing? Dry or 
als who present with a pleural effusion, often the productive?
first sign of a mesothelioma, always ask about possible ■	 Is the patient capable of producing a normal, 
asbestos exposure in jobs back to the time of first explosive cough, or is the voice weak or 
employment (Box 12.8). non-existent even when he is asked to cough?



SECTION Three
171

Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.9  Points to note in a general assessment Box 12.10  Signs to look for in the hands
■	 Physique and gait Clubbing
■	 Voice Pallor
■	 Breathlessness Warm, well-perfused palms (CO2 retention)
■	 Clubbing of the fingers Cyanosis
■	 Tobacco staining of fingers
■	 Bruising and/or thinness of skin Flap
■	 Venous pulses Tremor
■	 Cyanosis or pallor Tobacco staining
■	 Ptosis Bruising and/or thin skin
■	 Swollen face Pulse rate and character
■	 Collateral vessels across anterior chest wall
■	 Intercostal recession
■	 Use of accessory respiratory muscles
■	 Lymph nodes Box 12.11  Observing the chest

■	 Rate of respiration
■	 Rhythm of respiration
■	 Chest expansion
■	 Symmetry
■	 Surgical scars

45° (this is often more upright than patients choose 
for themselves).

Hands
The hands should be inspected for clubbing, pallor 
or cyanosis (Box 12.10). Tobacco-stained fingers may 
indicate a heavy smoker. Respiratory causes of clubbing 
include carcinoma of the bronchus, pulmonary fibrosis, 
bronchiectasis, lung abscess and pleural empyema. A 
fine tremor may indicate the use of inhaled β2 agonists, 
such as salbutamol. A flap may indicate carbon dioxide 
retention or hypercapnia. Such patients are often 
drowsy, with warm hands and a bounding pulse. In 
a significant asthma attack, the pulse rate is usually 
raised. The systolic blood pressure also falls during 
the severe inspiratory effort of acute asthma, and the 
degree of this fall (the degree of pulsus paradoxus) 
can be used as a measure of asthma severity.

Figure 12.1  Respiratory failure. The patient is breathless at rest 
and there is central cyanosis with blueness of the lips and face. Respiratory rate and rhythm
The lips are pursed during expiration, a characteristic feature of The respiratory rate and pattern of respiration should 
COPD. This facial appearance is often accompanied by heart be noted. The normal rate of respiration in a relaxed 
failure with peripheral oedema (cor pulmonale). adult is about 14-16 breaths per minute (Box 12.11). 

Tachypnoea is an increased respiratory rate observed 
by the doctor, whereas dyspnoea is the symptom of 

■	 Is the wheezing audible, usually loudest in breathlessness experienced by the patient. Apnoea 
expiration, or is there stridor, a high-pitched means cessation of respiration.
inspiratory noise? Cheyne-Stokes breathing is the name given to a 

■	 What is on the bedside table (e.g. inhalers, a disturbance of respiratory rhythm in which there is 
peak flow meter, tissues, a sputum pot, an cyclical deepening and quickening of respiration, 
oxygen mask, nebulizer, CPAP machine)? followed by diminishing respiratory effort and rate, 

■	 What is the physique and state of general sometimes associated with a short period of complete 
nourishment of the patient? apnoea, the cycle then being repeated. This is often 

For the examination, the patient should be resting observed in severely ill patients and particularly in 
comfortably on a bed or couch, supported by pillows severe cardiac failure, narcotic drug poisoning and 
so that he can lean back comfortably at an angle of neurological disorders. It is occasionally seen, especially 



172 12 Respiratory system ﻿
during sleep, in elderly patients without any obvious Examination of the chest
serious disease.

Some patients may have apnoeic episodes during Relevant anatomy
sleep owing to complete cessation of respiratory The interpretation of signs in the chest often causes 
effort (central apnoea) or, much more commonly, problems for the beginner. A review of the relevant 
apnoea despite continuation of respiratory effort. anatomy may help.
This is known as obstructive sleep apnoea, is due to The bifurcation of the trachea corresponds on the 
obstruction of the upper airways by soft tissues in anterior chest wall with the sternal angle, the trans-
the region of the pharynx and is commoner in obese verse bony ridge at the junction of the body of the 
patients. sternum and the manubrium sterni. Posteriorly, the 
Venous pulses level is at the disc between the fourth and fifth 

thoracic vertebrae. The ribs are most easily counted 
The venous pulses in the neck (see Ch. 13) should downwards from the second costal cartilage, which 
be inspected. A raised jugular venous pressure (JVP) articulates with the sternum at the extremity of the 
may be a sign of cor pulmonale, right heart failure sternal angle.
caused by chronic pulmonary hypertension in severe A line from the second thoracic spine to the sixth 
lung disease, commonly COPD. Pitting oedema of rib, in line with the nipple, corresponds to the upper 
the ankles and sacrum is usually present. However, border of the lower lobe (oblique or major interlobar 
engorged neck veins can be due to superior vena cava fissure). On the right side, a horizontal line from the 
obstruction (SVCO), usually because of malignancy sternum at the level of the fourth costal cartilage, 
in the upper mediastinum. SVCO can also be associ- drawn to meet the line of the major interlobar fissure, 
ated with facial swelling and plethora (redness) and marks the boundary between the upper and middle 
collateral circulation across the anterior chest wall. lobes (the horizontal or minor interlobar fissure). 

The greater part of each lung, as seen from behind, 
Head is composed of the lower lobe; only the apex belongs 
Examination of the eyes may reveal anaemia or, rarely, to the upper lobe. The middle and upper lobes on 
Horner’s syndrome, secondary to a cancer at the lung the right side and the upper lobe on the left occupy 
apex (Pancoast tumour) invading the cervical sym- most of the area in front (Fig. 12.2). This is most 
pathetic chain. The lips and tongue should be easily visualized if the lobes are thought of as two 
inspected for central cyanosis, which almost always wedges fitting together, not as two cubes piled one 
indicates poor oxygenation of the blood by the lungs, on top of the other (Fig. 12.3).
whereas peripheral cyanosis alone is usually due to The stethoscope is so much a part of the ‘image’ 
poor peripheral perfusion. Oral candida may indicate of a doctor that it is very easy for the student to 
use of inhaled steroids or be a sign of debilitation or forget that listening is only one part of the examination 
underlying immune suppression in the patient. of the chest. Obtaining the maximum possible 

Right Left Left Right

Upper Upper Upper
lobe lobe lobe

Middle
lobe

Middle
lobe Lower

lobe

Lower
lobe

Lower
lobe

Anterior Posterior

Figure 12.2  Anterior and posterior aspects of the lungs. 



SECTION Three
173

Respiratory system ﻿
Anterior Posterior Box 12.12  Features to note in assessing the shape of  

the chest
■	 Kyphosis
■	 Scoliosis

Upper lobe ■	 Flattening
■	 Overinflation
■	 Previous surgery causing asymmetry such as 

thoracoplasty
Sternum

Lower lobe

Box 12.13  Points to note on palpation of the chest
■	 Swelling
■	 Surgical emphysema
■	 Pain and tenderness
■	 Tracheal position
■	 Cardiac impulse

Figure 12.3  Lateral aspect of the left lung. ■	 Asymmetry
■	 Tactile vocal fremitus

information from your examination requires you to 
look, then to feel and, only then, to listen. anteroposterior diameter, making the horizontal cross-

section more circular. On X-ray, the hemidiaphragms 
Looking: inspection of the chest appear lower than usual, and flattened.
Appearance of the chest
First, look for any obvious scars from previous surgery. Movement of the chest
Thoracotomy scars (from lobectomy or pneumonec- Look to see if the chest movements are symmetrical. 
tomy (removal of the whole lung)) are usually visible If they seem to be diminished on one side, that is 
running from below the scapula posteriorly, sweeping likely to be the side on which there is an abnormality. 
round the axilla to the anterior chest wall. Pleural Intercostal recession, a drawing-in of the intercostal 
procedures such as intercostal drain insertion, biopsy spaces with inspiration, may indicate severe upper 
or VATS (video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery) may airways obstruction, as in laryngeal disease or tumours 
be associated with small scars, often in the axilla or of the trachea. In COPD, the lower ribs often move 
posteriorly. A small scar above the sternal notch paradoxically inwards on inspiration instead of the 
indicates a previous tracheostomy. Older patients normal outwards movement.
may have small scars in the midline below the clavicle 
indicative of a phrenic nerve crush (a previous treat- Feeling: palpation of the chest
ment for TB). Look for any lumps visible beneath Lymph nodes
the skin or any lesions on the skin itself. If you are The lymph nodes in the supraclavicular fossae, cervical 
examining from the right of the patient, ensure that regions and axillary regions should be palpated; don’t 
you thoroughly inspect the left side. It is easy to miss forget to feel gently behind the sternocleidomastoid 
a lateral thoracotomy scar or one that is hidden in a muscles. If they are enlarged, this may be secondary 
skinfold. to the spread of malignant disease from the chest, 

Next, inspect the shape of the chest itself. The and such findings will influence decisions regarding 
normal chest is bilaterally symmetrical and elliptical treatment. Lymph nodes in the neck are best felt by 
in horizontal cross-section, with the narrower diameter sitting the patient up and examining from behind.
being anteroposterior. The chest may be distorted by 
disease of the ribs or spinal vertebrae as well as by Swellings and tenderness
underlying lung disease (Box 12.12). Lobar collapse It is useful to palpate any part of the chest that 
produces characteristic changes on chest X-ray and presents an obvious swelling or where the patient 
they are shown in Fig. 12.4. complains of pain (Box 12.13). Feel gently, as pressure 

Kyphosis (forward bending) or scoliosis (lateral may increase the pain. It is often important, particu-
bending) of the vertebral column will lead to asym- larly in the case of musculoskeletal pain, to identify 
metry of the chest and, if severe, may significantly a site of tenderness (Box 12.14). Surgical emphysema 
restrict lung movement. A normal chest X-ray is seen (air in the tissues), which feels like popcorn or bubble 
in Fig. 12.5. Severe airways obstruction, particularly paper underneath the skin, is caused by trauma, 
long-term as in COPD (Fig. 12.6), may lead to over- pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and infection, 
inflated lungs. On examination, the chest may be as well as chest instrumentation following surgery or 
‘barrel shaped’, most easily appreciated as an increased a chest drain.



174 12 Respiratory system ﻿

A B

C D

Figure 12.4  Chest X-rays (CXR) showing lobar collapses. (Courtesy of 
Dr Stephen Ellis.) (A) CXR showing right upper lobe collapse; note the 
raised ‘tented’ right hemidiaphragm. (B) CXR showing right middle 
lobe collapse; the right heart border has become obscured. (C) CXR 
showing right lower lobe collapse, note the right hilum is lowered and 
now behind the right heart. (D) CXR showing left upper lobe collapse; 
note the ‘veil-like’ appearance over the left hemithorax with loss of the 
left heart border silhouette. (E) CXR showing left upper lobe collapse; 
also known as ‘sail-sign’ because the lobe collapses and sits behind 
the left side of the cardiac silhouette and obscures the medial 
hemidiaphragmatic silhouette. 

E



SECTION Three
175

Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.14  Causes of pain and tenderness in the chest
■	 A recent injury of the chest wall or inflammatory 

conditions
■	 Intercostal muscular pain – as a rule, localized painful 

spots can be discovered on pressure
■	 A painful costochondral junction
■	 Secondary malignant deposits in the rib
■	 Herpes zoster before the appearance of the rash

what you are about to do and avoid heavy-handedness 
in this situation. Rough technique is uncomfortable 
for the patient who may feel like he is being choked. 
A slight deviation of the trachea to the right may be 
found in healthy people.

Displacement of the cardiac impulse without 
displacement of the trachea may be due to scoliosis, 
to a congenital funnel depression of the sternum or 
to enlargement of the left ventricle. In the absence 
of these conditions, a significant displacement of the 
cardiac impulse or trachea or of both together suggests 

Figure 12.5  Normal chest X-ray. that the position of the mediastinum has been altered 
by disease of the lungs or pleura. The mediastinum 
may be pushed away from the affected side 
(contralateral deviation) by a pleural effusion or 
pneumothorax. Fibrosis or collapse of the lung will 
pull the mediastinum towards the affected side 
(ipsilateral deviation).

Chest expansion
As well as by simple inspection, possible asymmetrical 
expansion of the chest may be explored further by 
palpation. Face the patient and place the fingertips 
of both hands on either side of the lower ribcage so 
that the tips of the thumbs meet in the midline in 
front of the chest but are not touching the skin. A 
deep breath by the patient will increase the distance 
between the thumbs and indicate the degree of 
expansion. If one thumb remains closer to the midline, 
this suggests diminished expansion on that side. 
Essentially the hands are being used like a pair of 
calipers to measure expansion in the lateral bases of 
the lungs where maximum expansion occurs.

Tactile vocal fremitus is detected by palpation, 
but this is not a commonly used routine exami-
nation technique. It is discussed further under 
auscultation, below.

Figure 12.6  Chest X-ray in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary Feeling: percussion of the chest
disease. 

The technique of percussion was probably developed 
as a way of ascertaining how much fluid remained 

Trachea and heart in barrels of wine or other liquids. Auenbrugger 
The positions of the cardiac impulse and trachea applied percussion to the chest, having learned this 
should then be determined. Feel for the trachea by method in his father’s wine cellar. Effective percussion 
putting the second and fourth fingers of the examining is a knack that requires consistent practice; do so 
hand on each edge of the sternal notch and use the upon yourself or on willing colleagues, as percussion 
third finger to assess whether the trachea is central can be uncomfortable for patients if performed 
or deviated to one side. Warn the patient in advance repeatedly and inexpertly.



176 12 Respiratory system ﻿
The middle finger of the left hand is placed on the 2	 When the pleural cavity contains fluid, i.e. a 

part to be percussed and pressed firmly against it, pleural effusion is present.
with slight hyperextension of the distal interphalangeal Less commonly, a dull percussion note may be due 
joint. The back of this joint is then struck with the to thickened pleura. The percussion note is most dull 
tip of the middle finger of the right hand (vice versa when there is underlying fluid, as in a pleural effusion. 
if you are left-handed). The movement should be at Pleural effusion causes the sensation in the percussed 
your wrist rather than at your elbow. The percussing finger to be similar to that felt when a solid wall is 
finger is bent so that its terminal phalanx is at right percussed. This is often called ‘stony dullness’. By 
angles and it strikes the other finger perpendicularly. comparing side with side, it is usually easy to detect 
As soon as the blow has been given, the striking finger a unilateral pleural effusion. Pleural effusion usually 
is raised: the action is a tapping movement. leads to decreased chest wall movement. Effusions 

The two most common mistakes made by the may occur bilaterally in some patients, and this may 
beginner are first, failing to ensure that the finger of be more difficult to detect clinically.
the left hand is applied flatly and firmly to the chest An increase in resonance, or hyper-resonance, is 
wall and second, striking the percussion blow from more difficult to detect than dullness, and there is 
the elbow rather than from the wrist. The character no absolute level of normal percussion against which 
of the sound produced varies both qualitatively and extra resonance can be judged. It may be noticeable 
quantitatively (Box 12.15). When the air in a cavity when the pleural cavity contains air, as in pneumo-
of sufficient size and appropriate shape is set vibrating, thorax. Sometimes, however, in this situation one is 
a resonant sound is produced, and there is also a tempted to think that the slightly duller side is the 
characteristic sensation felt by the finger placed on abnormal side. Further examination and chest X-ray 
the chest. Try tapping a hollow cupboard and then will reveal the true situation.
a solid wall. The feeling is different as well as the 
sound. The sound and feel of resonance over a healthy Listening: auscultation of the chest
lung has to be learned by practice, and it is against Listen to the chest with the diaphragm, not the bell, 
this standard that possible abnormalities of percussion of the stethoscope (chest sounds are relatively high 
must be judged. pitched, and therefore the diaphragm is more sensitive 

The normal degree of resonance varies between than the bell). Ask the patient to take deep breaths 
individuals and in different parts of the chest in the in and out through the mouth. Demonstrate what 
same individual, being most resonant below the you would like the patient to do, and then check 
clavicles anteriorly and the scapulae posteriorly where visually that he is doing it while you listen to the 
the muscles are relatively thin and least resonant over chest. If the patient has a tendency to cough, ask 
the scapulae. On the right side, there is loss of reso- him to breathe more deeply than usual but not so 
nance inferiorly as the liver is encountered. On the much as to induce a cough with each breath. As with 
left side, the lower border overlaps the stomach, so percussion, you should listen in comparable positions 
there is a transition from lung resonance to tympanitic to each side alternately, switching back and forth 
stomach resonance. from one side to the other to compare (Box 12.16).

Always systematically compare the percussion note 
on the two sides of the chest, moving backwards and The breath sounds
forwards from one side to the other, not all the way Breath sounds have intensity and quality. The intensity 
down one side and then down the other. Percuss over (or loudness) of the sounds may be normal, reduced 
the clavicles; traditionally, this is done without an or increased. The quality of normal breath sounds is 
intervening finger on the chest, but there is no reason described as vesicular.
for this and it is more comfortable for the patient if Breath sounds will be normal in intensity when 
the finger of the left hand is used in the usual way. the lung is inflating normally but may be reduced if 
Percuss three or four areas on the anterior chest wall, there is localized airway narrowing, if the lung is 
comparing left with right. Percuss the axillae, then extensively damaged by a process such as emphysema 
three or four areas on the back of the chest.

Reduction of resonance (i.e. the percussion note is 
said to be dull) occurs in two important circumstances: Box 12.16  Points to note on auscultation of the chest
1	 When the underlying lung is more solid than 

■	 Vesicular breath sounds – normal breath sounds
usual, usually because of consolidation or 

■	 Bronchial breath sounds – consolidation
collapse.

■	 Vocal fremitus and resonance:
–	 whispering pectoriloquy – consolidation

Box 12.15  Points to note on percussion of the chest –	 aegophony – top of pleural effusion, consolidation
■	 Added sounds:

■	 Resonance –	 pleural rub – associated with infection
■	 Dullness –	 wheezes – asthma, COPD, infection, cardiac failure
■	 Pain and tenderness –	 crackles – pulmonary fibrosis, cardiac failure, COPD



SECTION Three
177

Respiratory system ﻿
or if there is intervening pleural thickening or pleural condition requiring urgent investigation and manage-
fluid. Breath sounds may be of increased intensity in ment. The noise is often both inspiratory and expira-
very thin subjects. tory. It may be heard at the open mouth without the 

Breath sounds probably originate from turbulent aid of the stethoscope. On auscultation of the chest, 
airflow in the larger airways. When you place your stridor is usually loudest over the trachea.
stethoscope upon the chest, you are listening to how Crackles are short, explosive sounds often described 
those sounds have been changed on their journey as bubbling or clicking. When the large airways are 
from their site of origin to the position of your full of sputum, a coarse rattling sound may be heard 
stethoscope diaphragm. Normal lung tissue makes even without the stethoscope. However, crackles are 
the sound quieter and selectively filters out some of not usually produced by moistness in the lungs. It is 
the higher frequencies. The resulting sound that you more likely that they are produced by sudden changes 
hear is called a vesicular breath sound. There is usually in gas pressure related to the sudden opening of 
no distinct pause between the end of inspiration and previously closed small airways. Crackles at the 
the beginning of expiration. beginning of inspiration are common in patients with 

When the area underlying the stethoscope is airless, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Localized 
as in consolidation, the sounds generated in the large loud and coarse crackles may indicate an area of 
airways are transmitted more efficiently, so they are bronchiectasis. Crackles are also heard in pulmonary 
louder and there is less filtering of the high frequencies. oedema. In diffuse interstitial fibrosis, crackles are 
The resulting sounds heard by the stethoscope are characteristically fine in character and late inspiratory 
termed bronchial breathing, classically heard over an in timing (and said to sound like rolling your fingers 
area of consolidated lung in cases of pneumonia. The through your hair near your ear).
sound resembles that obtained by listening over the The pleural rub is characteristic of pleural inflam-
trachea, although the noise there is much louder. mation and usually occurs in association with pleuritic 
The quality of the sound is rather harsh, the higher pain. It has a creaking or rubbing character (said to 
frequencies being heard more clearly. The expiratory sound like a foot crunching through fresh-fallen snow) 
sound has a more sibilant (hissing) character and, in some instances, can be felt with the palpating 
than the inspiratory one and lasts for most of the hand as well as being audible with the stethoscope.
expiratory phase. Take care to exclude false added sounds. Sounds 

The intensity and quality of all breath sounds is so resembling pleural rubs may be produced by move-
variable from patient to patient and in different situ- ment of the stethoscope on the patient’s skin or of 
ations that it is only by repeated auscultation of the clothes against the stethoscope tubing. Sounds arising 
chests of many patients that one becomes familiar in the patient’s muscles may resemble added sounds: 
with the normal variations and learns to recognize in particular, the shivering of a cold patient makes 
the abnormalities. any attempt at auscultation almost useless. The 

stethoscope rubbing over hairy skin may produce 
Added sounds sounds that resemble fine crackles.
Added sounds are abnormal sounds that arise in the 
lung itself or in the pleura. The added sounds most Vocal resonance
commonly arising in the lung are best referred to as When listening to the breath sounds, you are detecting 
wheezes and crackles. Older terms such as râles to with the stethoscope vibrations that have been made 
describe coarse crackles, crepitations to describe fine in the large airways. Vocal resonance is the resonance 
crackles and rhonchi to describe wheezes are poorly within the chest of sounds made by the voice. Vocal 
defined, have led to confusion and are best avoided. resonance is the detection of vibrations transmitted 

Wheezes are musical sounds associated with airway to the chest from the vocal cords as the patient 
narrowing. Widespread polyphonic wheezes, particu- repeats a phrase, usually the words ‘ninety-nine’. The 
larly heard in expiration, are the most common and ear perceives not the distinct syllables but a resonant 
are characteristic of diffuse airflow obstruction, sound, the intensity of which depends on the loudness 
especially in asthma and COPD. These wheezes are and depth of the patient’s voice and the conductivity 
probably related to dynamic compression of the of the lungs. As always in examining the chest, each 
bronchi, which is accentuated in expiration when point examined on one side should be compared at 
airway narrowing is present. A fixed monophonic once with the corresponding point on the other side.
wheeze can be generated by localized narrowing of Not surprisingly, conditions that increase or reduce 
a single bronchus, as may occur in the presence of a conduction of breath sounds to the stethoscope have 
tumour or foreign body. It may be inspiratory or similar effects on vocal resonance. Consolidated lung 
expiratory or both and may change its intensity in conducts sounds better than air-containing lung, so 
different positions. in consolidation the vocal resonance is increased and 

Wheezing generated in smaller airways should not the sounds are louder and often clearer. In such 
be mistaken for stridor associated with laryngeal circumstances, even when the patient whispers a 
disease or localized narrowing of the trachea or the phrase (e.g. ‘one, two, three’), the sounds may be 
large airways. Stridor almost always indicates a serious heard clearly; this is known as whispering pectoriloquy. 



178 12 Respiratory system ﻿
Above the level of a pleural effusion, or in some cases ■	 Feel the position of the trachea and check for 
over an area of consolidation, the voice may sound axillary lymphadenopathy.
nasal or bleating; this is known as aegophony, but is ■	 Feel the position of the apex beat.
an unusual physical finding. ■	 Check the symmetry of the chest movements 

by palpation.
Vocal fremitus ■	 Percuss the anterior chest and axillae.
Vocal fremitus is detected with the hand on the chest Sit the patient forward:
wall. It should, therefore, perhaps be regarded as part ■	 Inspect the posterior chest wall.
of palpation, but it is usually carried out after ausculta- ■	 Check for cervical and supraclavicular 
tion (see below). As with vocal resonance, the patient lymphadenopathy.
is asked to repeat a phrase such as ‘ninety-nine’. The ■	 Percuss the back of the chest.
examining hand feels distinct vibrations when this is ■	 Listen to the breath sounds.
done. Some examiners use the ulnar border of the ■	 Check the vocal resonance.
hand, but there is no good reason for this; the flat of ■	 Check the tactile vocal fremitus.
the hand, including the fingertips, is far more ■	 Check for sacral oedema.
sensitive. If you are examining a hospital inpatient, always 

From the above, it should be clear that listening take the opportunity to turn the pillow over before 
to the breath sounds, listening to the vocal resonance lying the patient back again; a cool, freshened pillow 
and eliciting vocal fremitus are all doing essentially is a great comfort to an ill person.
the same thing: they are investigating how vibrations ■	 Listen to the breath sounds on the front of the 
generated in the larynx or large airways are transmitted chest.
to the examining instrument, the stethoscope in the ■	 Check the vocal resonance.
first two cases and the fingers in the third. It follows ■	 Check the tactile vocal fremitus.
that in the various pathological situations, all three ■	 Check for pitting oedema of the ankles.
physical signs should behave in similar ways. Where Stand back for a moment and reflect upon whether 
there is consolidation, the breath sounds are better you have omitted anything or whether you need to 
transmitted to the stethoscope, so they are louder check or repeat anything. Thank the patient and 
and there is less attenuation of the higher frequencies, ensure he is dressed or appropriately covered.
that is, ‘bronchial breathing’ is heard. Similarly, the 
vocal resonance and the vocal fremitus are increased. Putting it together: interpreting the signs
Where there is a pleural effusion, the breath sounds 
are quieter or absent and the vocal resonance and Developing an appropriate differential diagnosis on 
vocal fremitus are reduced or absent. the basis of the signs you have elicited requires 

The intelligent student should now ask: ‘Why try thought and practice. Keeping the following in mind 
to elicit all three signs?’ The experienced physician will help:
will answer: ‘Because it is often difficult to interpret ■	 If movements are diminished on one side, there 
the signs that have been elicited, and three pieces of is likely to be an abnormality on that side.
information are more reliable than one.’ ■	 The percussion note is dull over a pleural 

effusion and over an area of consolidation – the 
Putting it together: an examination  duller the note, the more likely it is to be a 

of the chest pleural effusion.
■	 The breath sounds, the vocal resonance and the 

There is no single perfect way of examining the chest, tactile vocal fremitus are quieter or less obvious 
and most doctors develop their own minor variations over a pleural effusion, and louder or more 
of order and procedure. The following is one scheme obvious over an area of consolidation.
that combines efficiency with thoroughness: ■	 Over a pneumothorax, the percussion note is 
■	 Observe the patient generally and the more resonant than normal but the breath 

surroundings. Look for any medicine, sputum sounds, vocal resonance and tactile vocal 
pots, inhalers, nebulizers or, for example, CPAP fremitus are quieter or reduced. Pneumothorax 
machine around the patient’s bed. Is the patient is easily missed.
using oxygen – if so, how much, what is the rate?

■	 Ask the patient’s permission for the examination 
and ensure he is lying comfortably at 45°. Other investigations

■	 Examine the hands and take the pulse.
■	 Count the respiratory rate. Sputum examination
■	 Assess the jugular venous pressure (JVP).
■	 Check the face for signs of anaemia or cyanosis At the bedside

as well as evidence of ptosis and miosis. Hospital inpatients should have a sputum pot which 
■	 Inspect the chest movements and the anterior must be inspected (Box 12.17). Mucoid sputum is 

chest wall. characteristic in patients with chronic bronchitis 



SECTION Three
179

Respiratory system ﻿

Box 12.17  Characteristics to note when assessing sputum clinical assessment and other investigations, they may 
help establish a diagnosis. Second, they will help 

■	 Mucoid indicate the severity of the condition. Third, serial 
■	 Purulent measurements over time will show changes indicating 
■	 Frothy disease progression or, alternatively, a favourable 
■	 Bloodstained response to treatment. Finally, regular monitoring of 
■	 Rusty lung function in chronic diseases such as idiopathic 
■	 Frank haemoptysis pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis or obstructive 
■	 Casts airways disease may warn of deterioration.

Simple respiratory function tests fall into three 
when there is no active infection. It is clear and sticky main groups:
and not necessarily produced in a large volume. 1	 Measuring the size of the lungs.
Sputum may become mucopurulent or purulent 2	 Measuring how easily air flows into and out of 
when bacterial infection is present in patients with the airways.
bronchitis, pneumonia, bronchiectasis or a lung abscess. 3	 Measuring how efficient the lungs are in the 
In these last two conditions, the quantities may be process of gas exchange.
large and the sputum is often foul smelling. A spirometer will measure how much air can be 

Occasionally asthmatics have a yellow tinge to the exhaled after a maximal inspiration: the patient 
sputum, owing to the presence of many eosinophils. breathes in as much as he can, then blows out into 
People with asthma may also produce a particularly the spirometer until no more air at all can be breathed 
tenacious form of mucoid sputum, and sometimes out. This volume is called the vital capacity (VC). 
they cough up casts of the bronchial tree, particularly The amount of air in the lungs at full inspiration is 
after an attack. Patients with bronchopulmonary a measure of the total lung capacity and that still 
aspergillosis may bring up black sputum or sputum remaining after a full expiration is called the residual 
with black parts in it, which is the fungal element volume.
of the Aspergillus. The actual value of total lung capacity cannot be 

When sputum is particularly foul smelling, the measured with a spirometer. The simplest way of 
presence of anaerobic organisms should be suspected. determining it is to get the patient to inspire a known 
Very ill patients with pulmonary oedema may bring volume of air containing a known concentration of 
up pink or white frothy sputum. Rusty-coloured helium. Measuring the new concentration of helium 
sputum is characteristic of pneumococcal lobar that exists after mixing with the air already in the 
pneumonia. Blood may be coughed up alone or lungs enables the total lung capacity to be calculated. 
bloodstained sputum produced in bronchogenic Subtraction of the vital capacity from this value gives 
carcinoma, pulmonary tuberculosis, pulmonary the residual volume.
embolism, bronchiectasis or pulmonary hypertension Usually, vital capacity is measured after the patient 
(e.g. with mitral stenosis) being possible causes. has blown as hard and fast as possible into the 

spirometer, when the measurement is known as the 
In the laboratory forced vital capacity, or FVC. In normal lungs, VC 
Sputum may be examined under the microscope in and FVC are almost identical, but in COPD, compres-
the laboratory for the presence of pus cells and sion of the airways during a forced expiration leads 
organisms and may be cultured in an attempt to to closure of the airways earlier than usual, and FVC 
identify the causative agent of an infection and may be less than VC.
antibiotic resistance patterns. It is seldom practical Fig. 12.7A shows the trace produced by a spirometer. 
to wait for the results of such examinations, and most Time in seconds is on the x-axis and volume in litres 
clinical decisions have to be based on the clinical is on the y-axis. Thus, the trace moves up during 
probability of a particular infection being present. expiration assessing FVC and along the x-axis as time 

Do not forget to ask for sputum to be examined passes during expiration.
for acid-fast bacilli when appropriate; tuberculosis The volume of air breathed out in the first second of 
(TB) requires specialized techniques of laboratory a forced expiration is known as the forced expiratory 
microscopy and culture to identify the responsible volume in the first second – almost always abbreviated 
organisms, and if the diagnosis is suspected, these to FEV1. In normal lungs, the FEV1 is >70% of FVC. 
tests must be specifically requested. Non-tuberculous When there is obstruction to airflow, as in COPD, 
mycobacteria (NTN) can occur in patients with the time taken to expire fully is prolonged and the 
chronic underlying lung pathology such as COPD ratio of FEV1 to FVC is reduced. An example is 
and bronchiectasis. shown in Fig. 12.7B. A trace like this is described 

as showing an obstructive ventilatory defect. As 
Lung function tests noted above, the FVC may be reduced in severe 

airways obstruction but, in such cases, the FEV1 
Measurements of respiratory function may provide is reduced even more and the FEV1/FVC ratio 
valuable information. First, in conjunction with the remains low.



180 12 Respiratory system ﻿

6 4
FVC FVC

FEV
5 1

FEV1 3
4

3 2

2
1

1

0 0
0 1 2 3 0 2 4 6 8 10

A Time (seconds) B Time (seconds)

6 500
FVC

5
400

FEV1
4

300
3

200
2

1 100

0 0
am pm am pm am pm am pm am pm am pm

0 1 2 3 D Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat
C Time (seconds)

Figure 12.7  (A) Normal expiratory spirometer trace. (B) Spirometer trace showing an obstructive defect. Note the very prolonged 
(10-second) expiration. (C) Spirometer trace showing a restrictive defect. (D) Typical diurnal variation of peak flow, worse in the mornings, 
seen in a young asthmatic, during an exacerbation. 

Some lung conditions restrict expansion of the 
lungs but do not interfere with the airways. In such 
individuals, both FEV1 and FVC are reduced in 
proportion to each other, so the ratio remains normal 
even though the absolute values are reduced. Fig. 
12.7C shows a trace of this kind, a restrictive ventila-
tory defect in a patient with diffuse pulmonary 
fibrosis.

Look again at the normal expiratory spirogram (Fig. 
12.7A). The slope of the trace is steepest at the onset 
of expiration. The trace thus shows that the rate of 
change of volume with time is greatest in early 
expiration; in other words, the rate of airflow is 
greatest then. This measurement, the peak expiratory 
flow rate (PEFR), can be easily measured with a peak Figure 12.8  A mini-peak flow meter. 
flow meter. A simplified version of this device is 
shown in Fig. 12.8. This mini-peak flow meter is light Normal gas exchange consists of the uptake of 
and inexpensive, and people with asthma can use it oxygen into the pulmonary capillary blood and the 
to monitor themselves and alter their medication, as release of carbon dioxide into the alveoli. For this to 
suggested by their doctor, at the first signs of any fall be achieved, the ventilation of the lungs by air and 
in peak flow measurement, which indicates a deteriora- their perfusion by blood need to be anatomically 
tion in their condition (Fig. 12.7D). matched. An approximation of the efficiency of the 

Volume (litres) Volume (litres)

Peak flow (l/min) Volume (litres)



SECTION Three
181

Respiratory system ﻿
process of gas exchange may be obtained by measuring Box 12.18  Arterial blood gases
the pulmonary transfer factor for carbon monoxide. 
This is assessed with apparatus similar to that used Type 1 Respiratory failure (on air)
for the helium-dilution technique for measuring lung pH – 7.43
volumes. Instead of using helium, which does not PCO2 – 3.8
easily enter the blood, a known and very low con- PO2 – 7.5
centration of carbon monoxide is used. The haemo- HCO3 – 22.0
globin in the pulmonary capillaries very readily binds 
this gas. The patient inspires to total lung capacity O2 Sats – 91%

(TLC), holds the breath for 10 seconds, then expires Type 2 Decompensated respiratory failure (on air)
fully. The difference between the inspired carbon pH – 7.25
monoxide concentration and the expired concentration PCO2 – 9.3
is a measure of the efficiency of gas exchange and PO2 – 7.5
can be expressed per unit lung volume if TLC is 
simultaneously measured by the helium-dilution HCO3 – 31.2
technique. O2 Sats – 92%

Type 2 Compensated respiratory failure (1 L O2 and overnight 
Arterial blood sampling bilevel positive airway pressure (BIPAP))

In a sample of arterial blood, the partial pressures of pH – 7.41
oxygen (PaO2) and of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) and PCO2 – 6.3
the pH can be measured. The arterial PaCO2 will PO2 – 8.3
reflect the effective ventilation of alveoli that are HCO3 – 30.0
adequately perfused with blood so that efficient gas O2 Sats – 94%
exchange can take place. Provided the rate of produc-
tion of carbon dioxide by the body remains constant, 
the PaCO2 will be directly related to the level of 
alveolar ventilation. The normal range is 4.7-6.0 kPa Box 12.19  Points to note when assessing the chest X-ray
(36-45 mmHg). When alveolar ventilation is reduced, 

■
the PaCO2 will rise. A number of different conditions 	 Name of patient and date (and time) of X-ray

■
may reduce alveolar ventilation. Alveolar ventilation 	 Bony skeleton

■
rises and PaCO2 may fall in response to metabolic 	 Position of the patient

■
acidosis, in very anxious individuals who hyperventilate 	 Position of the trachea

■
and in many lung conditions that tend to reduce the 	 Outline of heart

■
oxygenation of the blood. The PaO2 is normally in 	 Outline of mediastinum

■
the range 11.3-14.0 kPa (80-100 mmHg). Any lung 	 Diaphragm

■
disease that interferes with gas exchange may reduce 	 Lung fields
arterial PaO2 (Box 12.18).

Imaging the lung and chest The position of the patient
Is the patient straight or rotated? If straight, the inner 

The chest X-ray ends of the clavicles will be equidistant from the 
The chest X-ray is an important extension of the midline of the vertebral body. This is important 
clinical examination (Box 12.19). This is particularly because any rotation will usually tend to alter the 
so in patients with respiratory symptoms, and a normal appearance of the mediastinum and the hilar shadows.
X-ray taken some time before the development of 
symptoms should therefore not be accepted as a The outline of the heart and the mediastinum
reason for not taking an up-to-date film. In many Is this normal in size, shape and position?
instances, it is of great value to have previous X-rays 
for comparison but, if these are lacking, then careful The position of the trachea
follow up with subsequent films may provide the This is seen as a dark column representing the air 
necessary information. within the trachea. Is the trachea centrally placed or 

The standard chest X-ray is a posteroanterior (PA) deviated to either side?
view taken with the film against the front of the 
patient’s chest and the X-ray source 2 m behind the The diaphragm
patient (see Fig. 12.5). The X-ray is examined sys- Can the diaphragm be seen on each side? Is it 
tematically on a viewing box or computer screen, normal in shape and position? Normally, the anterior 
according to the following plan and referring to the end of the sixth or seventh rib crosses the mid-
thoracic anatomy described at the beginning of this part of the diaphragm on each side, although the 
chapter. (See Figs 12.14-12.18 for more X-rays.) diaphragm on the right is usually a little higher 



182 12 Respiratory system ﻿
than on the left. Are the cardiophrenic angles 
clearly seen?

The lung fields
For radiological purposes, the lung fields are divided 
into three zones:
1	 The upper zone extends from the apex to a line 

drawn through the lower borders of the anterior 
ends of the second costal cartilages.

2	 The mid-zone extends from this line to one 
drawn through the lower borders of the fourth 
costal cartilages.

3	 The lower zone extends from this line to the 
bases of the lungs.

Each zone is systematically examined on both sides, 
and any area that appears abnormal is carefully 
compared with the corresponding area on the opposite 
side. The horizontal fissure, which separates the right 
upper and middle lobes, may sometimes be seen 
running horizontally in the third and fourth interspaces 
on the right side.

The bony skeleton
■	 Is the chest symmetrical?
■	 Is scoliosis present?
■	 Are the ribs unduly crowded or widely spaced 

in any area? Figure 12.9  A lateral chest X-ray. 
■	 Are cervical ribs present?
■	 Are any ribs eroded or absent?

As well as the standard PA view, lateral views are evidence on CT of mediastinal involvement. CT 
sometimes carried out to help localize any lesion that scanning will demonstrate the presence of dilated 
is seen. In examining a lateral view, as in Fig. 12.9, and distorted bronchi, as in bronchiectasis. Diffuse 
follow this plan: pulmonary fibrosis will be shown by a modified 
■	 Identify the sternum anteriorly and the vertebral high-resolution/thin-section scan technique. Emboli 

bodies posteriorly. The cardiac shadow lies in the pulmonary arteries can be demonstrated by a 
anteriorly and inferiorly. rapid data acquisition spiral CT technique and has 

■	 There should be a lucent (dark) area advantages over isotope lung scanning (see below) 
retrosternally which has approximately the in diagnosing pulmonary embolism in patients with 
same density as the area posterior to the heart pre-existing lung disease. Many scanners can now 
and anterior to the vertebral bodies. Check for generate three-dimensional representations of the 
any difference between the two or for any thoracic structures (Fig. 12.10).
discrete lesion in either area.

■	 Check for any collapsed vertebrae. Radioisotope imaging
■	 The lowest vertebrae should appear darkest, In the lungs, the most widely used radioisotope 

becoming whiter as they progress superiorly. technique is combined ventilation and perfusion 
Interruption of this smooth gradation suggests scanning, used to aid the diagnosis of pulmonary 
an abnormality overlying the vertebral bodies embolism.
involved. The perfusion scan is performed by injecting 

intravenously a small dose of macroaggregated human 
The computed tomography scan albumin particles labelled with technetium-99m 
The routine chest X-ray consists of shadows at all (99mTc). A gamma-camera image is then built up of 
depths in the chest superimposed on one another. In the radioactive particles impacted in the pulmonary 
computed tomography (CT) scanning, X-rays are vasculature; the distribution of perfusion in the lung 
passed through the body at different angles and the can then be seen. The ventilation scan is obtained 
resulting information is processed by computer to by inhalation of a radioactive gas such as krypton-81m 
generate a series of cross-sectional images. A thoracic (81mKr), again using scanning to identify the distribu-
CT scan thus comprises a series of cross-sectional tion of the radioactivity.
‘slices’ through the thorax at various levels. Blood is usually diverted away from areas of the 

The CT scan is a vital part of the staging of lung lung that are unventilated, so a matched defect on 
cancer, and inoperability may be demonstrated by both the ventilation and perfusion scans usually 



SECTION Three
183

Respiratory system ﻿
indicates parenchymal lung disease. If there are areas perfused by blood) suggest a high probability of 
of ventilated lung which are not perfused (i.e. an pulmonary embolism.
unmatched defect), this is evidence in support of an 
embolism to the unperfused area. Fig. 12.11 shows Magnetic resonance imaging
a ventilation-perfusion isotope scan. The unmatched Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is useful in 
defects (areas ventilated by the inspired air but not demonstrating mediastinal abnormalities and can help 

evaluate invasion of the mediastinum and chest wall 
by tumour. Apart from the fact that it does not use 
ionizing radiation, currently it has few other advan-
tages over CT in imaging the thorax. MRI is particu-
larly degraded by movement artefact in imaging the 
chest because of the relatively long data acquisition 
time and therefore is not used for assessing the lung 
parenchyma, but faster scanners are beginning to 
overcome this drawback.

Ultrasound
Ultrasound reveals much less detail than CT scanning 
but has the advantages that it does not involve radia-
tion and, as it gives ‘real-time’ images, the operator 
can visualize what is happening as it happens. It is 
used for examining diaphragmatic movement and, 
when available, it is recommended that ward-based 
pleural procedures, such as chest drain insertion and 
pleural aspiration or biopsy, be undertaken under 
ultrasound guidance.

A paralysed hemidiaphragm usually results from 
Figure 12.10  A CT-generated 3D reconstruction demonstrating damage to the phrenic nerve by a mediastinal tumour. 
that the patient has a tracheal stenosis (arrow). (Courtesy of If the patient is asked to make a sudden inspiratory 
Professor R.H. Reznek.) effort, as in sniffing, the non-paralysed side of the 

Figure 12.11  Ventilation/perfusion 
isotope scan of the lungs. Segmental and 
subsegmental loss of perfusion (B and D) 
can be seen with relatively normal 
ventilation (A and C). The clear punched-
out areas in the perfusion (B and D) scans 
indicate areas of reduced isotope 
concentration during the perfusion scan. 
Thus these are areas of reduced blood 
flow. The ventilation scans show normal 
aeration of the lungs as depicted by the 
isotope distribution in the pulmonary 
airways. These sequences of scans are 

A B
suggestive of pulmonary embolism 
because they show impaired perfusion with 
normal ventilation. 

C D



184 12 Respiratory system ﻿
diaphragm moves down, so intrathoracic pressure brushings of any endobronchial abnormality can be 
drops, and the paralysed side moves up. sent to the laboratory for cytological examination.

Ultrasound is also valuable in distinguishing pleural At bronchoscopy, specimens are also taken for 
thickening from pleural fluid. With real-time imaging, microbiological examination in order to determine 
the latter can be seen to move with changes in posture. the nature of any infecting organisms and should 
When such fluid is present, ultrasound may be used include samples for AFB. In diffuse interstitial lung 
to aid placement of a catheter to drain the collection disease, such as sarcoidosis or pulmonary fibrosis, the 
and also to steer a draining catheter accurately into technique of transbronchial biopsy can be used to 
an intrapulmonary abscess. obtain small specimens of lung parenchyma for 

histological examination to help confirm the 
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning diagnosis.
In this technique, a radiolabelled 18-flurodeoxyglucose Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) is gradually 
(FDG) molecule is administered, which is taken up becoming more available. It involves a modified 
by metabolically active tissues such as cancers, showing bronchoscope fitted with an ultrasound probe and a 
as ‘hot spots’ on the image. It is useful in detecting fine-gauge aspiration needle and is used to biopsy 
regional and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and is thoracic lymph nodes. The procedure is normally 
now widely used in the staging of lung cancers and undertaken as a day case and under sedation. The 
to assess suitability for surgery in patients with lung scope is thicker than the average bronchoscope and 
cancer. is passed into the patient’s airways via a plastic mouth 

guard rather than the nose. The ultrasound processor 
Flexible bronchoscopy and endobronchial is able to image lymph nodes on the other side of 
ultrasound (EBUS) the bronchial airways; the operator can then use the 
Bronchoscopy is an essential tool in the investigation aspiration needle to puncture that bronchial wall and 
of many forms of respiratory disease. For discrete biopsy the lymph nodes. A similar procedure, endo-
abnormalities, such as a mass seen on chest X-ray scopic ultrasound (EUS), can be used via the 
and suspected to be a lung cancer, bronchoscopy is oesophagus, and combining these two techniques 
usually indicated to investigate its nature. Under local allows all of the mediastinal lymph nodes to be 
anaesthesia, the flexible bronchoscope is passed biopsied. In the majority of cases, they have replaced 
through the nose, pharynx and larynx, down the mediastinoscopy as the biopsy technique of choice 
trachea, and the bronchial tree is then inspected. Figs and are particularly useful in the diagnosis and staging 
12.12 and 12.16 shows a lung cancer seen down the of lung cancer, sarcoidosis and tuberculosis.
bronchoscope. Flexible biopsy forceps are passed 
down a channel inside the bronchoscope and are Pleural aspiration and biopsy
used to obtain tissue samples for histological examina- A pleural effusion (Fig. 12.17) can give rise to 
tion. Similarly, aspirated bronchial secretions and diagnostic problems and, sometimes, management 

Figure 12.13  A CT-guided percutaneous biopsy in progress.  
The radiodense (white) structure penetrating the chest wall is  

Figure 12.12  A lung cancer, seen down the bronchoscope. the biopsy needle. 



SECTION Three
185

Respiratory system ﻿

Figure 12.14  Chest X-ray showing a right upper lobe mass in a 
70-year-old smoker presenting with haemoptysis. Figure 12.16  Chest X-ray showing right apical scarring and 

tracheal deviation (detectable clinically) from previous 
tuberculosis and hyperinflation of the lungs due to chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease in a 66-year-old long-term smoker 
with 5 years of increasing breathlessness. 

Figure 12.15  Bronchoscopic view of the tumour seen 
radiologically in Fig. 12.14 – histology showed a squamous 
carcinoma. 

Figure 12.17  Chest X-ray showing a large left pleural effusion in 
a young man with a 4-month history of malaise, fever, night 
sweats and weight loss. The diagnosis of tuberculosis was 

problems when the amount of fluid causes respiratory confirmed on histology of a pleural biopsy and culture of the 
embarrassment. When a pleural effusion is seen as a pleural fluid. 
presenting feature in a middle-aged or older patient, 
the most likely cause is a malignancy. Less commonly, 
particularly in younger patients, it may be due to examination. Large pleural effusions may need to be 
tuberculosis. In either case, the diagnosis is best drained by an indwelling catheter, left in situ until 
obtained by both aspiration of the fluid and pleural the fluid has been fully removed. As noted above, 
biopsy. Aspiration alone has a lower diagnostic yield. ultrasound guidance can be helpful, particularly if 

After anaesthetizing the skin, subcutaneous tissues the fluid is loculated in various pockets, and should 
and pleura, pleural fluid may be aspirated by syringe be used whenever equipment and trained personnel 
and needle for microbiological and cytological are available.



186 12 Respiratory system ﻿
suspected, pleural fluid pH should be measured in 
non-purulent effusions and, if not available, pleural 
fluid glucose should be assessed. A pH <7.2 strongly 
suggests the need for pleural drainage (pleural fluid 
glucose <3.4 mmol/l). Pleural fluid LDH is also raised 
in the presence of infection.

Biopsies of the pleura can be obtained percutane-
ously and under local anaesthesia using an Abram’s 
pleural biopsy needle. This technique can be used 
when there is pleural fluid present to obtain pleural 
tissue for histological examination and, whenever 
tuberculosis is a possibility, for microbiological culture. 
If ultrasound or CT examination shows the pleura 
to be thickened, biopsies may be obtained under 
image guidance by Abram’s needle, a Tru-cut needle 
and similar techniques.

Ridge thoracoscopy and video-assisted 
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS)
These techniques enable the pleural cavity to be 

Figure 12.18  Chest X-ray showing a right basal pneumonia in a examined directly and biopsies taken; VATS is now 
previously fit 40-year-old man with fever, breathlessness, central becoming the procedure of choice. The ridge method 
cyanosis and pleuritic pain. Chest signs included bronchial is normally performed under a general anaesthetic 
breathing and a pleural rub in the right lower zone. The cyanosis 
was due to the shunting of deoxygenated blood through the by a surgeon who uses direct vision down a rigid 
consolidated lung, the increased respiratory rate leading to a low thoracoscope after the lung has been deflated. Increas-
PaCO2 because of increased clearance of carbon dioxide by the ingly, however, more minimally invasive procedures 
unaffected alveoli. Streptococcus pneumoniae was grown on blood using flexible thoracoscopes attached to cameras are 
cultures. being used (video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, or 

VATS) and are not only able to biopsy the pleura 
but also biopsy the lung, mediastinal nodes and 

Box 12.20  Light’s criteria for diagnosing a pleural effusion tumours, decortication of empyemas, lobectomy and 
pneumonectomy, pleurodesis and endoscopic stapled 

An effusion is exudative if it meets one of the following bullectomy (lung volume reduction surgery).
criteria:
■	 Pleural fluid protein/serum protein >0.5 Lung biopsy
■	 Pleural fluid lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)/serum LDH As noted above, the technique of transbronchial 

ratio >0.6 biopsy can be used to obtain samples of lung paren-
■	 Pleural fluid LDH > two-thirds the upper limit of normal chyma, but often samples are too small for diagnosis. 

serum LDH In this circumstance, biopsies of the lung taken at 
thoracoscopy may be of value. Occasionally, a formal 
open lung biopsy obtained at thoracotomy may be 

Cytological examination of pleural fluid may necessary.
demonstrate the presence of malignant cells. Many When there is a discrete, localized lesion, it may 
polymorphs may be seen if the effusion is secondary be possible to obtain a biopsy percutaneously with 
to an underlying pneumonic infection. With tuber- the aid of CT scanning to direct the insertion of the 
culosis, the fluid usually contains many lymphocytes, biopsy needle (Fig. 12.13). All samples should be 
although tubercle bacilli are rarely seen. Therefore, sent for histology, microbiology and TB culture.
all pleural fluid samples should be cultured for possible 
tuberculosis, because this infection can coexist with Immunological tests
other pathologies and it is so important not to miss Asthma attacks may be due to type I immediate 
it. In empyema, pus is present in the pleural cavity. hypersensitivity reactions on exposure to common 
It has a characteristic appearance and is full of white environmental proteins known as allergens. In such 
cells and organisms. individuals, an inherited tendency to produce exag-

The pleural fluid should also be examined for gerated levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE) against 
protein content. A transudate (resulting from cardiac these allergens is responsible. Part of the assessment 
or renal failure) can be distinguished from an exudate of such allergic patients might include skin-prick tests 
(from pleural inflammation or malignancy) by its (see Ch. 19). Alternatively, serum levels of specific 
lower protein content (<30 g/l). Light’s criteria may (individual) IgEs against allergens may be measured 
also be applied (Box 12.20). When infection is by blood tests (formerly known as RAST tests) to 



SECTION Three
187

Respiratory system ﻿
demonstrate sensitization. The total IgE level is often drug monoresistance and multidrug-resistant TB 
raised in patients with asthma, rhinitis or eczema. (MDR TB) continue to be a major problem in the 
Delayed (type IV, cell-mediated) hypersensitivity is flight against the infection. Newer techniques help 
shown by the Mantoux and Heaf skin tests, used to to diagnose active infection and drug resistance using 
detect the presence of sensitivity to tuberculin protein. molecular methods to detect Mycobacterium tuber-
Precipitating immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies in culosis (MTB) complex DNA, e.g. the polymerase 
the circulating blood are present in patients with chain reaction (PCR) assay Xpert® MTB/RIF 
some fungal diseases, such as bronchopulmonary (Cepheid, California, United States) and the line 
aspergillosis or aspergilloma. In patients suspected of probe assay MTBDRplus® (Hain Lifescience, Nehren, 
having an allergic alveolitis, IgG antibodies may be Germany).
demonstrated to the relevant antigens. Tests for latent TB and Heaf and Mantoux skin 

tests are still widely used to look for evidence of 
Tests for Tuberculosis (TB) previous TB exposure. In many centres, they are being 
Tuberculosis (TB) continues to be a worldwide superseded by blood tests that use the interferon 
problem, occurring most frequently as a pulmonary gamma-releasing assay (IGRA) which measures 
infection but also commonly in the lymph nodes, as interferon gamma released from T-cells activated by 
well as being able to affect any organ of the body. the presence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. At the 
As outlined above, sending relevant samples for smear present time, the IGRA blood test does not differenti-
and culture is essential and often forgotten in hospitals ate between active and latent TB and should be used 
where TB is less common. Sputum can easily be only to diagnosis latent disease. False negatives can 
tested by light microscopy using a Zeihl-Neelsen or occur in disseminated and non-pulmonary active 
auramine stain to look for the acid-fast bacilli (AFB). disease and can therefore be misleading when diagnos-
Where available, culture should be undertaken as ing active infection.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Cardiovascular system 13 
Ceri Davies

Introduction pain, fatigue and dyspnoea, palpitations, and presyn-
cope or syncope (see below and Box 13.1). Previous 

The recent decades have seen major changes in pat- illness should also be recorded, as it may provide 
terns of cardiovascular disease. In the developed important clues about the cardiac diagnosis – thyroid, 
world, syphilitic and tuberculous involvement of the connective tissue and neoplastic disorders, for example, 
cardiovascular system has become rare, and the can all affect the heart. Rheumatic fever in childhood 
incidence of rheumatic disease has declined consider- is important because of its association with valvular 
ably. Myocardial and conducting tissue disease are heart disease and diabetes and dyslipidaemias because 
diagnosed with increasing frequency and the impor- of their association with coronary artery disease. 
tance of arterial hypertension has become recognized. Smoking is a major risk factor for coronary artery 
Coronary artery disease has emerged as the major disease. Alcohol abuse predisposes to cardiac arrhyth-
cardiovascular disorder of the era, becoming the most mias and cardiomyopathy. The cardiac history should 
common cause of premature death throughout Europe, quantify both habits in terms of pack-years smoked 
North America and Australasia. In the last 30 years, and units of alcohol consumed. The use of other 
there has been a steady fall in age-specific death rates recreational drugs (in particular cocaine) can be 
from coronary artery disease in Western societies, but associated with acute presentations of chest pain, 
elsewhere its prevalence is increasing and in the and intravenous drug use is an increasingly important 
underdeveloped world it now threatens to overtake cause of infective endocarditis. The family history 
malnutrition and infectious disease as the major cause should always be documented because coronary artery 
of death. disease and hypertension often run in families, as do 

As patterns of cardiovascular disease have changed, some of the less common cardiovascular disorders, 
so have the cardiologist’s diagnostic tools, although such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Indeed, in 
a good history and thorough clinical examination patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a family 
remain cornerstones of the assessment of patients history of sudden death is probably the single most 
with cardiovascular disease. A century that started important indicator of risk. Finally, the drug history 
with the stethoscope, the sphygmomanometer, the should be recorded, as many commonly prescribed 
chest X-ray and a very rudimentary electrocardiogram drugs are potentially cardiotoxic. β-blockers and some 
saw the development of a variety of new imaging calcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil), for 
modalities, using ultrasound, radioisotopes, X-rays example, can cause symptomatic bradycardias, and 
and magnetic resonance. This non-invasive capability tricyclic antidepressants and β-agonists can cause 
was complemented by introduction of the catheteriza- tachyarrhythmias. Vasodilators cause variable reduc-
tion laboratory, permitting angiographic imaging, tions in blood pressure, which can lead to syncopal 
electrophysiological recording and tissue biopsy of attacks, particularly in patients with aortic stenosis. 
the heart. Add to this the resources of the chemical The myocardial toxicity of certain cytotoxic drugs 
pathology, bacteriology and molecular biology labo- (notably doxorubicin and related compounds) is an 
ratories, and the array of diagnostic technology important cause of cardiomyopathy.
available to the modern cardiologist becomes almost 
overwhelming. Chest pain

Myocardial ischaemia, pericarditis, aortic dissection 
The cardiac history and pulmonary embolism are the most common 

causes of acute, severe chest pain. Chronic, recurrent 
The history should record details of presenting chest pain is usually caused by angina, oesophageal 
symptoms, of which the most common are chest reflux or musculoskeletal pain.



190 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.1  Structure for the cardiac history Box 13.2  Angina
Presenting complaint (PC) Typical patient
■	 The symptom that prompts the patient to seek medical ■	 Middle-aged or elderly man or woman often with a 

attention – commonly chest pain, breathlessness family history of coronary heart disease and one or more 
(dyspnoea), palpitation, dizziness or blackouts (syncope) of the major reversible risk factors (smoking, 

History of presenting complaint (HPC) hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes)
■	 This should define the nature of the symptoms, initially Major symptoms

through open questioning. Closed questions are used to ■	 Exertional chest pain and shortness of breath. Pain 
elicit the presence or absence of features which help to often described as ‘heaviness’ or ‘tightness’ and may 
differentiate between diagnoses: radiate into arms, neck or jaw
–	 Chest pain: site, radiation, character, duration, Major signs

provoking and relieving factors, associated 
■

symptoms? 	 None, although hypertension and signs of 
–	 Breathlessness: orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal hyperlipidaemia (xanthelasmata, xanthomas) may be 

dyspnoea, ankle swelling, cough, wheeze, present
■

haemoptysis? 	 Peripheral vascular disease, evidenced by absent pulses 
–	 Palpitation: sudden onset and offset, ‘thumps’ or or arterial bruits, is commonly associated with coronary 

‘pauses’, presyncope or syncope? heart disease
–	 Dizziness/syncope: provoking factors, warning, Diagnosis

duration, recovery? ■	 Typical history is most important diagnostic tool
Risk factors for cardiovascular disease ■	 Electrocardiogram (ECG): often normal; may show Q 
■	 Smoking, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes, waves in patients with previous myocardial infarction

■
family history of premature vascular disease 	 Exercise ECG test: exertional ST depression

■	 Isotope or magnetic resonance perfusion scan: 
Past medical history (PMH) stress-induced perfusion defects
■	 Stroke or transient ischaemic attack (TIA), renal ■	 Coronary angiogram: confirms coronary artery disease

impairment, rheumatic fever, peripheral vascular Additional investigations
disease, other

■
■	 Operations, hospital clinic attendances 	 Blood sugar and lipids to rule out diabetes and 

dyslipidaemia
Family history

Comments
■	 Cardiac disease, sudden death

■	 A careful history is the single most important means of 
Drug history diagnosing angina
■	 Include quantification of alcohol intake
■	 If a patient with known cardiovascular disease is not 

taking the recognized standard treatment, the reason for 
this should be established. For example, why no statin Box 13.3  Causes of angina
treatment in a patient with previous myocardial 
infarction? – ‘Because it caused muscle pains’ Impaired myocardial oxygen supply

■	 Coronary artery disease:
–	 atherosclerosis
–	 arteritis in connective tissue disorders

Myocardial ischaemia –	 diabetes mellitus
Ischaemia of the heart results from an imbalance ■	 Coronary artery spasm
between myocardial oxygen supply and demand, ■	 Congenital coronary artery disease:
producing pain called angina (Boxes 13.2 and 13.3). –	 arteriovenous fistula
Angina is usually a symptom of atherosclerotic coro- –	 anomalous origin from pulmonary artery
nary artery disease, which impedes myocardial oxygen ■	 Severe anaemia or hypoxia
supply. Other causes of coronary artery disease (Box Increased myocardial oxygen demand
13.4) are rare. However, it is important to be vigilant ■	 Left ventricular hypertrophy:
for causes of angina due to increased myocardial –	 hypertension
oxygen demand, such as aortic stenosis. The history –	 aortic valve disease
is diagnostic for angina if the location of the pain, –	 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
its character, its relation to exertion and its duration ■	 Tachyarrhythmias
are typical. The patient describes retrosternal pain 
that may radiate into the arms, the throat or the jaw. 
It has a constricting character, is provoked by exertion 
and relieved within minutes by rest. The patient’s 



SECTION Three
191

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.4  Causes of coronary artery disease Box 13.5  Acute coronary syndromes
■	 Atherosclerosis Typical patient
■	 Arteritis ■	 Middle-aged (male) or elderly (either sex) patient, often 

–	 systemic lupus erythematosus with a family history of coronary heart disease and one 
–	 polyarteritis nodosa or more of the major reversible risk factors (smoking, 
–	 rheumatoid arthritis hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes)
–	 ankylosing spondylitis ■	 In many patients, there is no preceding history of 
–	 syphilis angina
–	 Takayasu’s disease Major symptoms

■	 Coronary dissection
■

–	 spontaneous 	 Chest pain and shortness of breath. Pain usually 
–	 catheter or angioplasty induced prolonged and often described as ‘heaviness’ or 

‘tightness’, with radiation into arms, neck or jaw. 
■	 Embolism

–	 infective endocarditis Alternative descriptions include ‘congestion’ or ‘burning’, 
–	 left atrial/ventricular thrombus which may be confused with indigestion
–	 left atrial/ventricular tumour Major signs
–	 prosthetic valve thrombus ■	 Frequently none
–	 paradoxical embolism ■	 Autonomic disturbance, sweating, vomiting implies 
–	 complication of cardiac catheterization myocardial infarction

■	 Coronary mural thickening ■	 Tachycardia (anterior myocardial infarction), bradycardia 
–	 amyloidosis (inferior myocardial infarction)
–	 radiation therapy ■	 Fourth heart sound, dyskinetic precordial impulse, 
–	 Hurler’s disease pulmonary oedema with large infarcts
–	 pseudoxanthoma elasticum Diagnosis

■	 Other causes of coronary luminal narrowing
–	 aortic dissection (STEMI = ST elevation myocardial infarction)
–	 coronary spasm Unstable 

■	 Congenital coronary artery disease STEMI Non-STEMI angina
–	 anomalous origin from pulmonary artery ECG ST Normal, ST Normal, ST 
–	 arteriovenous fistula elevation depression, depression, 

T-wave T-wave 
inversion inversion

threshold for angina is typically reduced after eating Cardiac Raised Raised Normal
or in cold weather due to the diversion of blood to biomarkers, 
the gut and the increased myocardial work consequent e.g. troponin 
upon peripheral vasoconstriction, respectively. Occa- I or T
sionally angina is provoked only by the first significant Additional investigations
activity of the day, a phenomenon known as the ■	 Biochemistry: blood sugar and lipids to rule out diabetes 
‘warm-up effect’ due to myocardial preconditioning. and dyslipidaemia
Less commonly, myocardial ischaemia may manifest ■	 Risk stratification: echocardiogram (left ventricular 
as breathlessness, fatigue or symptoms that the patient function), coronary angiogram in high-risk patients, 
finds difficult to describe – ‘I just have to stop’ – in perfusion imaging in low-risk patients
which case the clues to the diagnosis are the relation 
of symptoms to exertion, the presence of risk factors Comments
for coronary artery disease and the absence of an ■	 History and troponin testing most useful diagnostic tools 
alternative explanation for the symptoms, such as in non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes
heart failure.

Acute coronary syndromes
In these life-threatening cardiac emergencies, the exacerbated by lying recumbent and reduced by 
pain is similar in location and character to angina sitting forward. Pericarditis is usually idiopathic or 
but is usually more severe, more prolonged and caused by Coxsackie B infection. It may also occur 
unrelieved by rest (Box 13.5). as a complication of myocardial infarction, but other 

causes are seen less commonly (Box 13.6).
Pericarditis
Pericarditis causes central chest pain, which is sharp Aortic dissection
in character and aggravated by deep inspiration, cough Aortic dissection produces severe tearing pain in 
or postural changes. Characteristically, the pain is either the front or the back of the chest. The onset 



192 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.6  Causes of acute pericarditis Box 13.8  Pulmonary embolism
■	 Idiopathic Typical patient
■	 Infective: ■	 Recent surgery, lower limb fracture or long-distance air 

–	 viral (Coxsackie B, influenza, herpes simplex) travel; obese; sedentary; heart failure; malignancy
–	 bacterial (Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobacterium Major symptoms

tuberculosis)
■

■	 Connective tissue disease: 	 Chest pain, dyspnoea, haemoptysis, syncope
–	 systemic lupus erythematosus Major signs
–	 rheumatoid arthritis ■	 Peripheral emboli, pleural rub
–	 polyarteritis nodosa ■	 Large, central emboli, tachycardia, hypotension, 

■	 Uraemia cyanosis, raised jugular venous pressure (JVP)
■	 Malignancy (e.g. breast, lung, lymphoma, leukaemia) Diagnosis
■	 Radiation therapy

■
■	 Acute myocardial infarction 	 D-Dimer: a negative D-dimer in a low-risk patient 
■	 Post-myocardial infarction/cardiotomy (Dressler’s makes pulmonary embolism very unlikely

■
syndrome) 	 ECG: sinus tachycardia, right bundle branch block 

(RBBB), classical ‘S1, Q3, T3’ pattern uncommon
■	 Chest X-ray: normal, wedge-shaped peripheral 

opacification, absent pulmonary vascular markings
■

Box 13.7  Aortic dissection 	 Echocardiogram: dilated right heart in some cases of 
large central pulmonary embolism

Typical patient ■	 CT pulmonary angiogram: has superseded V/Q scanning 
■	 Middle-aged or elderly patient with a history of as the diagnostic test of choice

hypertension or arteriosclerotic disease Comments
■	 Occasionally younger patient with aortic root disease 

■	 Suspect pulmonary embolism in patients with 
(e.g. Marfan syndrome) unexplained hypoxia. Thrombolytic therapy should be 

Major symptoms considered for patients with pulmonary embolism 
■	 Chest pain, typically interscapular associated with shock and/or a dilated right heart on 
Major signs echo. Patients with no risk factors for pulmonary 

embolism should be investigated for prothrombotic 
■	 Often none states.
■	 Sometimes regional arterial insufficiency (e.g. occlusions 

of coronary artery causing myocardial infarction, carotid 
or vertebral artery causing stroke, spinal artery causing 
hemi- or quadriplegia, renal artery causing renal with breathlessness and chest pain that can be 
failure); subclavian artery occlusion may cause indistinguishable from ischaemic chest pains and 
differential blood pressure in either arm; aortic syncope. Risk factors for pulmonary embolism should 
regurgitation; cardiac tamponade; sudden death be sought in the history (Box 13.8).

Diagnosis Rare cardiovascular causes of chest pain include 
mitral valve disease associated with massive left atrial 

■	 Chest X-ray: widened mediastinum, occasionally with dilatation. This causes discomfort in the back, some-
left pleural effusion times associated with dysphagia due to oesophageal 

■	 Transoesophageal echocardiogram, computed compression. Aortic aneurysms can also cause pain 
tomography (CT) scan, or magnetic resonance imaging in the chest owing to local compression.
(MRI) scan confirms dissection

Comments Dyspnoea
■	 Type A dissections involve the ascending aorta and are Dyspnoea is an abnormal awareness of breathing 

usually treated surgically. Type B dissections involve the occurring either at rest or at an unexpectedly low 
arch and/or descending aorta and are usually managed level of exertion. It is a major symptom of many 
medically or with an endovascular stent cardiac disorders, particularly left heart failure (Table 

13.1), but its mechanisms are complex. In acute 
pulmonary oedema and orthopnoea, dyspnoea is 

is abrupt, unlike the crescendo quality of ischaemic due mainly to the elevated left atrial pressure that 
cardiac pain (Box 13.7). characterizes left heart failure (Box 13.9). This 

produces a corresponding elevation of the pulmonary 
Pulmonary embolism capillary pressure and increases transudation into the 
Peripheral pulmonary embolism causes sudden-onset lungs, which become oedematous and stiff. Oxygena-
sharp, pleuritic chest pain, breathlessness and haem- tion of blood in the pulmonary arterioles is reduced, 
optysis. Major, central pulmonary embolism presents causing hypoxaemia, and this, together with the extra 



SECTION Three
193

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.9  Acute left ventricular failure Box 13.10  Congestive heart failure
Typical patient Typical patient
■	 Patient with acute myocardial infarction or known left ■	 Middle-aged (male) or elderly (either sex) patient with a 

ventricular disease history of myocardial infarction or long-standing 
Major symptoms hypertension

■	 In cases where there is no clear cause, always enquire 
■	 Severe dyspnoea, orthopnoea, frothy sputum about alcohol consumption
Major signs Major symptoms
■	 Low-output state (hypotension, oliguria, cold periphery), 

■	 Exertional fatigue and shortness of breath, with 
tachycardia, S3, sweating, crackles at lung bases orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea in 

Diagnosis advanced cases
■	 Chest X-ray: bilateral air space consolidation with Major signs

typical perihilar distribution
■	 Fluid retention: basal crackles, raised JVP, peripheral 

■	 Echocardiogram: usually confirms left ventricular oedema
disease

■	 Reduced cardiac output: cool skin, peripheral cyanosis
Additional investigations ■	 Other findings: third heart sound
■	 ECG: may show evidence of acute or previous myocardial Diagnosis

infarction
■	 ECG: usually abnormal; often shows Q waves (previous 

■	 Blood gas analysis: shows variable hypoxaemia myocardial infarction), left ventricular hypertrophy 
Comments (hypertension), or left bundle branch block (LBBB)
■	 Although most cases are caused by acute myocardial ■	 Chest X-ray: cardiac enlargement, congested lung fields

infarction or advanced left ventricular disease, it is vital ■	 Echocardiogram: left ventricular dilatation with regional 
to exclude valvular disease which is potentially (coronary heart disease) or global (cardiomyopathy) 
correctable by surgery contractile impairment

Additional investigations
■	 Raised B-type natriuretic peptide useful in cases of 

Table 13.1  Causes of heart failure diagnostic uncertainty
■	 Renal function as prelude to diuretic and angiotensin 

Ventricular converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy
pathophysiology Clinical examples ■	 Blood count to rule out anaemia
Restricted filling Mitral stenosis Comments

Constrictive pericarditis
■	 The echocardiogram is the single most important 

Restrictive cardiomyopathy diagnostic test in the patient with heart failure
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Pressure loading Hypertension
Aortic stenosis
Coarctation of the aorta Table 13.2  NYHA classification

Volume loading Mitral regurgitation NYHA class Description
Aortic regurgitation

Contractile Coronary artery disease I Asymptomatic
impairment Dilated cardiomyopathy II Symptoms on normal exertion, 

Myocarditis e.g. walking up a flight of stairs
Arrhythmia Severe bradycardia III Symptoms on minimal exertion, 

Severe tachycardia e.g. getting dressed
IV Symptoms at rest

effort required to ventilate the stiff lungs, causes 
dyspnoea. left atrial pressure, and other factors must therefore 

be important. These include respiratory muscle fatigue 
Exertional dyspnoea and the effects of exertional acidosis on peripheral 
Exertional dyspnoea is the most troublesome symptom chemoreceptors. As left heart failure worsens, exercise 
in heart failure (Box 13.10). Exercise causes a sharp tolerance deteriorates. In advanced disease, the patient 
increase in left atrial pressure and this contributes to is dyspnoeic at rest.
the pathogenesis of dyspnoea by causing pulmonary Breathlessness in heart failure can be simply clas-
congestion (see above). However, the severity of sified by use of the New York Heart Association 
dyspnoea does not correlate closely with exertional Classification (Table 13.2). It is simple to acquire 



194 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
and, despite poor reproducibility and its subjective in the elderly in whom it is frequently compounded 
nature, provides powerful prognostic information. by medication. Abrupt reductions in blood pres
For example, patients with Class IV heart failure sure and cerebral perfusion cause the patient 
have a very poor outlook. to fall to the ground, whereupon the condition 

corrects itself.
Orthopnoea
In patients with heart failure, lying flat causes a steep Vasovagal syncope
rise in left atrial and pulmonary capillary pressure, This is caused by autonomic overactivity, usually 
resulting in pulmonary congestion and severe dysp- provoked by emotional or painful stimuli, less com-
noea. To obtain uninterrupted sleep, extra pillows monly by coughing or micturition (‘cough syncope’ 
are required, and in advanced disease, the patient or ‘micturition syncope’). Only rarely are syncopal 
may choose to sleep sitting in a chair. attacks so frequent as to be significantly disabling 

(‘malignant’ vasovagal syndrome). Vasodilatation and 
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea inappropriate slowing of the pulse combine to reduce 
Frank pulmonary oedema on lying flat wakes the blood pressure and cerebral perfusion. Recovery is 
patient from sleep with distressing dyspnoea and fear rapid if the patient lies down.
of imminent death. The symptoms are corrected by 
standing upright, which allows gravitational pooling Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
of blood to lower the left atrial and pulmonary capil- Exaggerated vagal discharge following external 
lary pressure, the patient often feeling the need to stimulation of the carotid sinus (e.g. from shaving or 
obtain air at an open window. a tight shirt collar) causes reflex vasodilatation and 

slowing of the pulse. These may combine to reduce 
Fatigue blood pressure and cerebral perfusion in some elderly 

patients, causing loss of consciousness.
Exertional fatigue is an important symptom of 
heart failure and is particularly troublesome towards Valvular obstruction
the end of the day. Its aetiology is complex, but 
it is caused partly by deconditioning and muscular Fixed valvular obstruction in aortic stenosis may 
atrophy. prevent a normal rise in cardiac output during exer-

tion, such that the physiological vasodilatation that 

Palpitation occurs in exercising muscle produces an abrupt 
reduction in blood pressure and cerebral perfusion, 

Awareness of the heartbeat is common during exertion resulting in syncope. Vasodilator therapy may cause 
or heightened emotion. Under other circumstances syncope by a similar mechanism. Intermittent obstruc-
it may be indicative of an abnormal cardiac rhythm. tion of the mitral valve by left atrial tumours (usually 
A description of the rate and rhythm of the palpi- myxoma or thrombus) may also cause syncopal 
tation is essential as are exacerbating behaviours, episodes (Fig. 13.1).
such as exercise or caffeine intake. Extrasystoles 
are common but rarely signify important heart Stokes-Adams attacks
disease. They are usually experienced as ‘missed’ These are caused by self-limiting episodes of asystole 
or ‘dropped’ beats; the forceful beats that follow (Fig. 13.2) or rapid tachyarrhythmias (including 
may also be noticed. Rapid irregular palpitation is ventricular fibrillation). The loss of cardiac output 
typical of atrial fibrillation. Rapid regular palpitation of causes syncope and striking pallor. Following restora-
abrupt onset occurs in atrial, junctional and ventricular tion of normal rhythm, recovery is rapid and associated 
tachyarrhythmias. with flushing of the skin as flow through the dilated 

cutaneous bed is re-established.
Dizziness and syncope
Cardiovascular disorders produce dizziness and The cardiac examination
syncope by transient hypotension, resulting in abrupt 
cerebral hypoperfusion. For this reason, patients who A methodical approach is recommended, starting 
experience cardiac syncope usually describe either with inspection of the patient and proceeding to 
brief lightheadedness or no warning symptoms at all examination of the radial pulse, measurement of heart 
prior to their syncopal attacks. Recovery is usually rate and blood pressure, examination of the neck 
rapid, unlike with other common causes of syncope (carotid pulse, jugular venous pulse), palpation of 
(e.g. stroke, epilepsy, overdose). the anterior chest wall, auscultation of the heart, 

percussion and auscultation of the lung bases and, 
Postural hypotension finally, examination of the peripheral pulses and 
Syncope on standing upright reflects inadequate auscultation for carotid and femoral arterial bruits 
baroreceptor-mediated vasoconstriction. It is common (Box 13.11).



SECTION Three
195

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.1  Left atrial myxoma. 2D echocardiogram (long-axis view). During diastole, the tumour (arrow) prolapses through the mitral 
valve and obstructs left ventricular filling. 

Figure 13.2  Prolonged sinus arrest. After the fifth sinus beat there is a pause of about 1.8 seconds terminated by a nodal escape beat 
(arrow) before sinus rhythm resumes. 

Box 13.11  Routine for the cardiovascular  and displace the apex, giving a spurious impression 
system examination of cardiac enlargement. The presence of a median 

sternotomy scar usually indicates previous coronary 
■	 Wash hands artery bypass graft (CABG) and/or cardiac valve 
■	 Introduce yourself to patient surgery. The long saphenous vein is the standard 
■	 Recline patient at 45° conduit for vein grafts, so patients with prior CABG 
■	 Observe general appearance – comfortable, breathless, often also have a scar along the medial aspect of one 

pale? or both legs. A lateral thoracotomy scar may indicate 
■	 Inspect the hands for clubbing, splinter haemorrhages, previous mitral valvotomy. Large ventricular or aortic 

nicotine staining aneurysms may cause visible pulsations. Superior 
■	 Examine the radial pulse(s) for symmetry, rate, rhythm, vena caval obstruction is associated with prominent 

character (collapsing?) venous collaterals on the chest wall. Prominent venous 
■	 Measure the blood pressure collaterals around the shoulder occur in axillary or 
■	 Assess the height and waveform of the JVP subclavian vein obstruction.
■	 Examine the carotid pulse character (slow rising?) and Hypercholesterolaemia may be suggested by the 

volume (Corrigan’s sign?) presence of tendon and ocular xanthelasma.
■	 Inspect the face, eyes and mucous membranes for 

xanthelasma, corneal arcus and anaemia, and cyanosis, Anaemia
respectively Anaemia may exacerbate angina and heart failure. 

■	 Inspect the chest for scars and pulsations Pallor of the mucous membranes is a useful but 
■	 Assess the position and character of the apex beat sometimes misleading physical sign, and diagnosis 
■	 Palpate the praecordium for heaves and thrills requires laboratory measurement of the haemoglobin 
■	 Auscultate the heart concentration.
■	 Auscultate the lungs
■	 Examine the ankles and sacrum for oedema Cyanosis
■	 Examine the peripheral pulses Cyanosis is a blue discoloration of the skin and mucous 

membranes caused by increased concentration of 
reduced haemoglobin in the superficial blood vessels. 

Inspection of the patient Peripheral cyanosis may result when cutaneous 
vasoconstriction slows the blood flow and increases 

Chest wall deformities such as pectus excavatum oxygen extraction in the skin and the lips. It is 
should be noted, as these may compress the heart physiological during cold exposure. It also occurs in 



196 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
heart failure, when reduced cardiac output produces 1	 Reduced sodium delivery to the nephron. This 
reflex cutaneous vasoconstriction. In mitral stenosis, is caused by reduced glomerular filtration due 
cyanosis over the malar area produces the character- to constriction of the preglomerular arterioles  
istic mitral facies or malar flush. in response to sympathetic activation and 

Central cyanosis may result from the reduced angiotensin II production.
arterial oxygen saturation caused by cardiac or pul- 2	 Increased sodium reabsorption from the 
monary disease. It affects not only the skin and the nephron. This is the more important 
lips but also the mucous membranes of the mouth. mechanism. It occurs particularly in the 
Cardiac causes include pulmonary oedema (which proximal tubule early in heart failure but, as 
prevents adequate oxygenation of the blood) and failure worsens, renin-angiotensin activation 
congenital heart disease. Congenital defects associated stimulates aldosterone release, which increases 
with central cyanosis include those in which desatu- sodium reabsorption in the distal nephron.
rated venous blood bypasses the lungs by (‘reversed’) Salt and water retention expands plasma volume 
shunting through septal defects or a patent ductus and increases the capillary hydrostatic pressure. 
arteriosus (e.g. Eisenmenger’s syndrome, Fallot’s Hydrostatic forces driving fluid out of the capillary 
tetralogy). exceed the osmotic forces reabsorbing it, so that fluid 

The mouth should also be inspected for signs of accumulates in the interstitial space. The effect of 
poor dental hygiene. gravity on capillary hydrostatic pressure ensures that 

oedema is most prominent around the ankles in the 
Clubbing of the fingers and toes ambulant patient and over the sacrum in the bedrid-
In congenital cyanotic heart disease, clubbing is not den patient. In advanced heart failure, oedema may 
present at birth but develops during infancy and may involve the legs, genitalia and trunk. Transudation 
become very marked. Infective endocarditis is the into the peritoneal cavity (ascites), the pleural and 
only other cardiac cause of clubbing. pericardial spaces may also occur.

Other cutaneous and ocular signs of  Arterial pulse
infective endocarditis The arterial pulses should be palpated for evaluation 
Other signs of infective endocarditis are caused by of rate, rhythm, character and symmetry.
immune complex deposition in the capillary circula-
tion. A vasculitic rash is common, as are splinter Rate and rhythm
haemorrhages in the nail bed, although these are very By convention, both rate and rhythm are assessed by 
non-specific findings. Other ‘classic’ manifestations palpating the right radial pulse. Rate, expressed in 
of endocarditis including Osler’s nodes (tender beats per minute (bpm), is measured by counting 
erythematous nodules in the pulps of the fingers), the number of beats in a timed period of 15 seconds 
Janeway lesions (painless erythematous lesions on and multiplying by 4. Normal sinus rhythm is regular, 
the palms) and Roth’s spots (erythematous lesions but in young patients may show phasic variation in 
in the optic fundi) are now rarely seen. rate during respiration (sinus arrhythmia). An irregular 

rhythm usually indicates atrial fibrillation but may 
Coldness of the extremities also be caused by frequent ectopic beats or self-
In patients hospitalized with severe heart failure, limiting paroxysmal arrhythmias. In patients with 
coldness of the extremities is an important sign of atrial fibrillation, the rate should be measured by 
reduced cardiac output. It is caused by reflex vaso- auscultation at the cardiac apex, because beats that 
constriction of the cutaneous bed. follow very short diastolic intervals may create a 

‘pulse deficit’ by not generating sufficient pressure 
Pyrexia to be palpable at the radial artery.

Infective endocarditis is invariably associated with Character
pyrexia, which may be low grade or ‘swinging’ in Character is defined by the volume and waveform 
nature if paravalvular abscess develops. Pyrexia of the pulse and should be evaluated at the right 
also occurs for the first 3 days after myocardial carotid artery (i.e. the pulse closest to the heart and 
infarction. least subject to damping and distortion in the arterial 

tree). Pulse volume provides a crude indication of 
Oedema stroke volume, being small in heart failure and large 
Subcutaneous oedema that pits on digital pressure in aortic regurgitation. The waveform of the pulse is 
is a cardinal feature of congestive heart failure. Pres- of greater diagnostic importance (Fig. 13.3). Severe 
sure should be applied over a bony prominence (tibia, aortic stenosis produces a slow-rising carotid pulse; 
lateral malleoli, sacrum) to provide effective compres- the fixed obstruction restricts the rate at which 
sion. Oedema is caused by salt and water retention blood can be ejected from the left ventricle. In aortic 
by the kidney. Two mechanisms are responsible: regurgitation, in diastole, the left ventricle receives 



SECTION Three
197

Cardiovascular system ﻿

200
Aortic regurgitation Inspiration
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
Normal carotid pulse 100
Aortic stenosis

150
0

Figure 13.4  Paradoxical pulse (radial artery pressure signal). 
The patient had severe tamponade. Note the exaggerated 

100 (>10 mmHg) decline in arterial pressure during inspiration. 

inspiration. ‘Pulsus paradoxus’ therefore represents 
an exaggeration of the normal inspiratory decline 
in systolic pressure and is not truly paradoxical. 

50 Pulsus paradoxus in acute severe asthma is thought 
to be due to negative pleural pressure increasing 
afterload and thereby impedance to left ventricular 
emptying.

0 It is measured by inflating a blood pressure cuff 
0 100 200 300 400 until no sounds are heard. The pressure is then slowly 

Milliseconds decreased until systolic sounds are first heard during 
Figure 13.3  The waveform of the pulse is characterized by  expiration but not during inspiration – note this 
the rate of rise of the carotid upstroke. Note that in aortic reading. The pressure is slowly decreased further 
regurgitation, the upstroke is rapid and followed by abrupt until sounds are heard throughout the respiratory 
diastolic ‘collapse’. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the upstroke cycle (inspiration and expiration) – note this second 
is also rapid and the pulse has a jerky character. In aortic reading. If the pressure difference between the two 
stenosis, the upstroke is slow with a plateau. readings is >10 mmHg, it can be classified as pulsus 

paradoxus

not only its normal pulmonary venous return but Symmetry
also a proportion of the blood ejected into the aorta Symmetry of the radial, brachial, carotid, femoral, 
during the previous systole as it flows back through popliteal and pedal pulses should be confirmed. A 
an incompetent valve. The resultant large stroke reduced or absent pulse indicates an obstruction more 
volume, vigorously ejected, produces a rapidly rising proximally in the arterial tree, usually caused by 
carotid pulse, which collapses in early diastole owing atherosclerosis or thromboembolism and less com-
to backflow through the aortic valve. This collapsing monly by aortic dissection. Coarctation of the aorta 
pulse can be exaggerated at the radial artery by lifting causes symmetrical reduction and delay of the femoral 
the arm. In mixed aortic valve disease, a biphasic pulses compared with the radial pulses (‘radiofemoral 
pulse with two systolic peaks is occasionally found. delay’), a sign that should be looked for in younger 
Alternating pulse – alternating high and low systolic patients with hypertension. Bruits from collateral 
peaks – occurs in severe left ventricular failure but vessels may also be heard over the back of such 
the mechanism for this is unknown. Paradoxical patients.
pulse refers to an inspiratory decline in systolic pres-
sure greater than 10 mmHg (Fig. 13.4). In normal 
circumstances, inspiration results in an increase in Measurement of blood pressure
venous return as blood is ‘sucked into’ the thorax by Blood pressure is measured indirectly, traditionally 
the decline in intrathoracic pressure. This increases by sphygmomanometry, but automated blood pressure 
right ventricular stroke volume, but left ventricular monitors are being used increasingly in clinical 
stroke volume falls slightly (ventricular interdepend- practice. The principle of manual blood pressure 
ence). When the heart is constrained in a ‘fixed box’ measurement is that turbulent flow through a partially 
by a pericardial effusion (cardiac tamponade) or by compressed artery (typically the brachial) creates 
thickened pericardium (pericardial constriction), the noises that can be auscultated with a stethoscope 
increased inspiratory right ventricular blood volume and the points at which these noises (called Korotkoff 
reduces left ventricular compliance, resulting in a sounds) change in intensity correlate with systemic 
more pronounced reduction in left ventricular filling, arterial pressures. Accurate blood pressure measure-
stroke volume and systolic blood pressure during ment requires careful technique; patients should be 

mmHg

mmHg



198 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
sitting or lying at ease as significant changes in arterial heart which elevates the jugular venous pulse (hepato
pressure occur with exertion, anxiety and changes in jugular reflux).
posture. The manometer should be at the same level 
of the cuff on the patient’s arm and the observer’s Jugular venous pressure
eye. For most adult patients, a standard cuff (12 cm The jugular venous pressure (JVP) should be assessed 
width) is appropriate, but obese subjects require use from the waveform of the internal jugular vein which 
of a wider (thigh) cuff of 15 cm or the blood pressure lies adjacent to the medial border of the sternocleido-
will be overestimated. For children, various sized mastoid muscle. Distention of the external jugular 
cuffs are available; select the one which covers most vein is a useful clue to an elevated JVP but, strictly 
of the upper arm leaving a gap of 1 cm or so below speaking, it should not be used because it can be 
the axilla and above the antecubital fossa. compressed as it passes under the clavicle. The JVP 

Palpate the radial pulse as the cuff is inflated to a is measured in centimetres vertically from the sternal 
pressure of 20 mmHg above the level at which radial angle to the top of the venous waveform. The normal 
pulsation can no longer be felt. Place the stethoscope upper limit is 4 cm. This is about 9 cm above the 
lightly over the brachial artery and reduce the pressure right atrium and corresponds to a pressure of 6 mmHg. 
in the cuff at a rate of 2-3 mmHg/s until the first Elevation of the JVP indicates a raised right atrial 
sounds are heard. This is the first Korotkoff sound pressure unless the superior vena cava is obstructed, 
and correlates with systolic blood pressure as flow is producing engorgement of the neck veins (Box 13.12). 
just possible through the pressure applied by the During inspiration, the pressure within the chest 
compressive cuff. As the pressure is lowered further, decreases and there is a fall in the JVP. In constrictive 
subtle changes in pitch and volume occur; these are pericarditis, and less commonly in tamponade, inspira-
the second and third Korotkoff sounds and are not tion produces a paradoxical rise in the JVP (Kussmaul’s 
important clinically. With further lowering of the sign) because the increased venous return that occurs 
pressure in the cuff, the artery becomes less com- during inspiration cannot be accommodated within 
pressed, flow becomes less turbulent and the sounds the constrained right side of the heart (Fig. 13.5).
over the brachial artery become muffled. This is the 
fourth Korotkoff sound. Shortly after this (usually 
1-10 mmHg lower), the sounds die away completely Box 13.12  Causes of elevated jugular venous pressure
as flow is unimpeded by the cuff; this is the fifth 
Korotkoff sound and correlates most accurately with ■	 Congestive heart failure
diastolic blood pressure. Its identification is also less ■	 Cor pulmonale
subjective than the fourth, but in some conditions ■	 Pulmonary embolism
(aortic regurgitation, arteriovenous fistula, pregnancy), ■	 Right ventricular infarction
the Korotkoff sounds remain audible despite complete ■	 Tricuspid valve disease
deflation of the cuff. In such situations, phase four ■	 Tamponade
must be used for the diastolic measurement. Both ■	 Constrictive pericarditis
systolic and diastolic values are recorded; the differ- ■	 Hypertrophic/restrictive cardiomyopathy
ence between these two values is called the pulse ■	 Superior vena cava obstruction
pressure. Certain conditions of the aortic valve may ■	 Iatrogenic fluid overload, particularly in surgical and 
cause important abnormalities of pulse pressure. renal patients
Supine and erect blood pressure measurements 
provide an assessment of baroreceptor function, a 
postural drop being defined by a fall in systolic blood Inspiration

pressure on standing. It is essential to work swiftly 20
as well as accurately, as compression of a limb will, 
by itself, cause a rise in blood pressure. If several 
successive measurements are made, the air pressure 
in the cuff should be allowed to fall to zero between 0
readings.

Jugular venous pulse
Fluctuations in right atrial pressure during the cardiac 
cycle generate a pulse that is transmitted backwards 
into the jugular veins. It is best examined in good 
light while the patient reclines at 45°. If the right Figure 13.5  Kussmaul’s sign. Jugular venous pressure recording 

in a patient with tamponade. The venous pressure is raised and 
atrial pressure is very low, however, visualization of there is a particularly prominent systolic ‘x’ descent, giving the 
the jugular venous pulse may require a smaller reclin- waveform of the JVP an unusually dynamic appearance. Note the 
ing angle. Alternatively, manual pressure over the inspiratory rise in atrial pressure (Kussmaul’s sign) reflecting  
upper right side of the abdomen may be used to the inability of the tamponaded right heart to accommodate  
produce a transient increase in venous return to the the inspiratory increase in venous return. 

mmHg



SECTION Three
199

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Waveform of jugular venous pulses Palpation of the chest wall
In sinus rhythm, the jugular venous pulse has a double The apex beat is defined as the lowest and most 
waveform attributable to the ‘a’ and ‘v’ waves sepa- lateral point at which the cardiac impulse can be 
rated by the ‘x’ and ‘y’ descents. The ‘a’ wave is palpated. Inferior or lateral displacement from its 
produced by atrial systole. It is followed by the ‘x’ normal location in the fifth intercostal space in the 
descent (marking descent of the tricuspid valve ring), mid-clavicular line usually indicates cardiac enlarge-
which is interrupted by the diminutive ‘c’ wave ment. Chronic volume loading of the left ventricle 
caused by tricuspid valve closure. Atrial pressure then 
rises again, producing the ‘v’ wave as the atrium fills 
passively during ventricular systole. The decline in 
atrial pressure as the tricuspid valve opens to allow 
ventricular filling produces the ‘y’ descent. Important QRS

abnormalities of the pattern of deflections are shown 
in Fig. 13.6. T

P
In atrial fibrillation, there is no atrial contraction. 

Consequently, there is no ‘a’ wave and the jugular 
venous pulse loses its double waveform. It is not ECG
always easy to differentiate venous from arterial A a
pulsations in the neck, but several features help to 

c
distinguish the jugular venous pulse from the carotid v

arterial pulse (Box 13.13). x y

Normal JVP

B
Box 13.13  Characteristics of the jugular venous pulse
■	 Double waveform (in sinus rhythm)
■	 Varies with respiration
■	 Varies with posture
■	 Impalpable
■	 Obliterated by pressure at base of waveform
■	 Transient increase in volume and height with Giant ‘a’ wave

hepatojugular reflux C

Figure 13.6  Waveform of the jugular venous pulse. (A) The ECG 
is portrayed at the top of the illustration. Note how electrical Cannon ‘a’ wave
events precede mechanical events in the cardiac cycle. Thus the P 
wave (atrial depolarization) and the QRS complex (ventricular D
depolarization) precede the ‘a’ and ‘v’ waves, respectively, of the 
JVP. (B) Normal JVP. The ‘a’ wave produced by atrial systole is the 
most prominent deflection. It is followed by the ‘x’ descent, 
interrupted by the small ‘c’ wave marking tricuspid valve closure. 
Atrial pressure then rises again (‘v’ wave) as the atrium fills 
passively during ventricular systole. The decline in atrial pressure 
as the tricuspid valve opens produces the ‘y’ descent. (C) Giant ‘a’ Giant ‘v’ wave
wave. Forceful atrial contraction against a stenosed tricuspid 
valve or a non-compliant hypertrophied right ventricle produces an E
unusually prominent ‘a’ wave. (D) Cannon ‘a’ wave. This is caused 
by atrial systole against a closed tricuspid valve. It occurs when 
atrial and ventricular rhythms are dissociated (complete heart 
block, ventricular tachycardia) and marks coincident atrial and 
ventricular systole. (E) Giant ‘v’ wave. This is an important sign of 
tricuspid regurgitation. The regurgitant jet produces pulsatile 
systolic waves in the JVP. (F) Prominent ‘x’ and ‘y’ descents. These 
occur in constrictive pericarditis and give the JVP an unusually Prominent ‘x’ and ‘y’ descents
dynamic appearance. In tamponade, only the ‘x’ descent is usually 
exaggerated. F



200 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
(mitral regurgitation, aortic regurgitation) causes left the narrowed valve ensures that the thickened leaflets 
ventricular dilatation, which can be appreciated are widely separated at the onset of systole. Thus 
clinically. In contrast, isolated pressure loading of the valve closure generates unusually vigorous vibrations. 
left ventricle (hypertension, aortic stenosis) causes In advanced mitral stenosis, the valve is rigid and 
left ventricular hypertrophy, which does not cause immobile and S1 becomes soft again.
displacement of the apex beat. Palpable third and 
fourth heart sounds give the apical impulse a double Second sound (S2)
thrust. In the past, considerable importance was The second sound corresponds to aortic and pulmo-
attached to the character of the apical impulse nary valve closure following ventricular ejection. S2 
(‘thrusting’ in aortic valve disease, ‘tapping’ in mitral is single during expiration. Inspiration, however, causes 
stenosis), but this is of very limited practical value physiological splitting into aortic followed by pul-
in the modern era. monary components because increased venous return 

Left ventricular aneurysms can sometimes be to the right side of the heart delays pulmonary valve 
palpated medial to the cardiac apex. Right ventricular closure. Important abnormalities of S2 are illustrated 
enlargement produces a systolic thrust (heave) in in Fig. 13.7.
the left parasternal area. The turbulent flow respon-
sible for murmurs may produce palpable vibrations Third and fourth sounds (S3, S4)
(thrills) on the chest wall, particularly in aortic The third and fourth are low-frequency sounds that 
stenosis, ventricular septal defect and patent ductus occur early and late in diastole, respectively. When 
arteriosus. present, they give a characteristic ‘gallop’ to the 

cardiac rhythm. Both sounds are best heard with the 
Auscultation of the heart bell of the stethoscope at the cardiac apex. They are 
The diaphragm and bell of the stethoscope permit caused by abrupt tensing of the ventricular walls 
appreciation of high- and low-pitched auscultatory following rapid diastolic filling. Rapid filling occurs 
events, respectively. The apex, lower left sternal edge, early in diastole (S3) following atrioventricular valve 
upper left sternal edge and upper right sternal edge opening and again late in diastole (S4) due to atrial 
should be auscultated in turn. These locations cor- contraction. S3 is physiological in children and young 
respond respectively to the mitral, tricuspid, pulmo-
nary and aortic areas, and loosely identify sites at 
which sounds and murmurs arising from the four EXPIRATION INSPIRATION
valves are best heard (Box 13.14). S1 S2 S1 S2

First sound (S1) A P A P
PHYSIOLOGICAL

This corresponds to mitral and tricuspid valve closure SPLITTING

at the onset of systole. It is accentuated in mitral 
EXAGGERATED A P A P

stenosis because prolonged diastolic filling through SPLITTING
Right bundle branch
block

Box 13.14  Routine for auscultation of the heart REVERSED SPLITTING P A P A
Left bundle branch

■	 Auscultate at apex with diaphragm block
■	 Reposition patient on left side – ‘Please turn onto your Aortic stenosis

left side’ A P A P
FIXED SPLITTING

■	 Listen with diaphragm (mitral regurgitation) and then Atrial septal defect
bell (mitral stenosis)

■	 Return patient to original position, reclining at 45° SINGLE-ABSENT P P

■	 Auscultate with diaphragm at lower left sternal edge AORTIC COMPONENT
Severe aortic stenosis

(tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid stenosis, ventricular 
septal defect) SINGLE-ABSENT

■	 Auscultate with diaphragm at upper left sternal edge PULMONARY A A
(pulmonary stenosis, pulmonary regurgitation, patent COMPONENT

Severe pulmonary
ductus arteriosus) stenosis

■	 Auscultate with diaphragm at upper right sternal edge Tetralogy of Fallot
(aortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy)

■	 Sit patient forward. Auscultate with diaphragm at lower Figure 13.7  Splitting of the second heart sound. The first sound, 
left sternal edge in held expiration (aortic regurgitation) representing mitral and tricuspid closure, is usually single, but the 
– ‘breathe in … breathe out … stop’ aortic and pulmonary components of the second sound normally 

■	 Auscultate over the carotid arteries (radiation of murmur split during inspiration as increased venous return delays right 
of aortic stenosis, carotid artery bruits) ventricular emptying. Abnormal splitting of the second heart sound 

is an important sign of heart disease. 



SECTION Three
201

Cardiovascular system ﻿
adults but usually disappears after the age of 40. It the turbulence is caused by increased flow through 
also occurs in high-output states caused by anaemia, a normal valve – usually aortic or pulmonary – produc-
fever, pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis. After the age of ing an ‘innocent’ murmur. However, murmurs may 
40, S3 is nearly always pathological, usually indicating also indicate valve disease or abnormal communica-
left ventricular failure or, less commonly, mitral tions between the left and right sides of the heart 
regurgitation or constrictive pericarditis. In the elderly, (e.g. septal defects).
S4 is sometimes physiological. More commonly, Rheumatic heart disease has become much less 
however, it is pathological, and occurs when vigorous common in developed countries, although it remains 
atrial contraction late in diastole is required to common elsewhere and is the cause of many of the 
augment filling of a hypertrophied, non-compliant classic heart murmurs (Box 13.15). Degenerative 
ventricle (e.g. hypertension, aortic stenosis, hyper- valve disease (calcific aortic stenosis, mitral regurgita-
trophic cardiomyopathy). tion due to chordal rupture) is increasingly common. 

Heart murmurs are defined by four characteristics: 
Systolic clicks and opening snaps loudness, quality, location and timing.
Valve opening, unlike valve closure, is normally silent. The loudness of a murmur reflects the degree of 
In aortic stenosis, however, valve opening produces turbulence. This relates to the volume and velocity 
a click in early systole that precedes the ejection of flow and not the severity of the cardiac lesion. 
murmur. The click is audible only if the valve cusps Loudness is graded on a scale of 1 (barely audible) 
are pliant and non-calcified, and is particularly to 6 (audible even without application of the stetho-
prominent in the congenitally bicuspid valve. A click scope to the chest wall). The quality of a murmur 
later in systole suggests mitral valve prolapse, par- relates to its frequency and is best described as low, 
ticularly when followed by a murmur. In mitral medium or high-pitched. The location of a murmur 
stenosis, elevated left atrial pressure causes forceful on the chest wall depends on its site of origin and 
opening of the thickened valve leaflets. This generates has led to the description of four valve areas (see 
a snap early in diastole that precedes the mid-diastolic above). Some murmurs radiate, depending on the 
murmur. velocity and direction of blood flow. The sound of 

the high-velocity systolic flow in aortic stenosis and 
mitral regurgitation, for example, is directed towards 

Heart murmurs the neck and the axilla, respectively; that of the 
Heart murmurs are caused by turbulent flow within high-velocity diastolic flow in aortic regurgitation is 
the heart and great vessels (Fig. 13.8). Occasionally directed towards the left sternal edge. Murmurs are 

CM (EC)
MSM

Patent ductus Pulmonary
arteriosus stenosis

EDM
Pulmonary

(EC) regurgitation
S4 MSM

MDM
Aortic stenosis Tricuspid

stenosis
PSM

Tricuspid
MSM EDM regurgitation

Aortic
regurgitation (PSA) OS

MDM
Mitral stenosis

MSM (MDM)
Atrial septal PSM

S3 Mitral
defect regurgitation

(MSC)
PSM LSM

Ventricular Mitral valve
septal defect prolapse

Figure 13.8  Heart murmurs. These are caused by turbulent flow within the heart and great vessels and may indicate valve disease. 
Heart murmurs may be depicted graphically as shown in this illustration. CM, continuous murmur; EC, ejection click; EDM, early diastolic 
murmur; LSM, late systolic murmur; MDM, mid-diastolic murmur; MSC, mid-systolic click; MSM, mid-systolic murmur; OS, opening snap; 
PSA, presystolic accentuation of murmur; PSM, pansystolic murmur; S3, third heart sound; S4, fourth heart sound. Parentheses indicate 
those auscultatory findings that are not constant. 



202 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.15  Rheumatic heart disease early diastolic, mid-diastolic or presystolic in timing. 
Continuous murmurs are audible in both phases of 

Typical patient the cardiac cycle.
■	 Middle-aged woman, less commonly man, with a history A mid-systolic (‘ejection’) murmur is caused by 

of childhood rheumatic fever (often not recognized or turbulence in the left or right ventricular outflow 
dismissed as trivial feverish illness). The mitral valve is tract during ejection. It starts following opening of 
almost invariably affected, commonly with associated the aortic or pulmonary valve, reaches a crescendo 
aortic valve involvement. Right-sided valves less in mid-systole and disappears before the second heart 
commonly affected. Presentation is usually with sound. The murmur is loudest in the aortic area (with 
exertional dyspnoea, less commonly with unexplained radiation to the neck) when it arises from the left 
atrial fibrillation or unheralded stroke ventricular outflow tract and in the pulmonary area 

■	 Pregnant woman presenting abruptly with atrial when it arises from the right ventricular outflow 
fibrillation and pulmonary oedema tract. It is best heard with the diaphragm of the 

Major symptoms stethoscope while the patient sits forward. Important 
■	 Mitral valve disease: dyspnoea or symptoms of frank causes of aortic ejection murmurs are aortic stenosis 

congestive failure and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
■	 Aortic valve disease: dyspnoea, sometimes angina or Aortic regurgitation also produces an ejection 

syncope murmur due to increased stroke volume and velocity 
of ejection. Pulmonary ejection murmurs may be 

Major signs caused by pulmonary stenosis or infundibular stenosis 
■	 Mitral stenosis: atrial fibrillation, signs of fluid retention (as in Fallot’s tetralogy).

(raised JVP ± peripheral oedema and basal crackles in In atrial septal defect, the pulmonary ejection 
lung fields), loud S1, opening snap in early diastole murmur results from right ventricular volume loading 
followed by low-pitched mid-diastolic murmur best and consequent increased blood flow through the 
heard at cardiac apex. With increasing calcification, the pulmonary valve and does not indicate organic valvular 
valve gets more rigid and the loud S1 and opening snap disease. ‘Innocent’ murmurs unrelated to heart disease 
disappear are always mid-systolic in timing and are caused by 

■	 Mitral regurgitation: atrial fibrillation, signs of fluid turbulent flow in the left (sometimes right) ventricular 
retention, pansystolic murmur best heard at cardiac outflow tract. In most cases, there is no clear cause, 
apex, often with third heart sound but they may reflect a hyperkinetic circulation in 

■	 Aortic stenosis: slow-rising carotid pulse, ejection conditions such as anaemia, pregnancy, thyrotoxi-
systolic murmur best heard at base of heart cosis or fever. They are rarely louder than grade 3, 

■	 Aortic regurgitation: fast-rising carotid pulse, ejection often vary with posture, may disappear on exertion 
systolic murmur with early diastolic murmur best heard and are not associated with other signs of heart 
at left sternal edge disease.

Diagnosis Pansystolic murmurs are audible throughout systole 
from the first to the second heart sounds. They are 

■	 Echocardiogram: diagnostic of rheumatic heart disease, caused by regurgitation through incompetent atrio-
Doppler studies providing additional information about ventricular valves and by ventricular septal defects. 
the severity of valvular stenosis or regurgitation The pansystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation is 

Treatment loudest at the cardiac apex and radiates into the left 
■	 Diuretics for fluid retention and vasodilators to increase axilla. It is best heard using the diaphragm of the 

forward flow through regurgitant left-sided valves. stethoscope with the patient lying on the left side. 
Digoxin or β-blockers for rate control in atrial fibrillation The murmurs of tricuspid regurgitation and ventricular 
plus warfarin to protect against embolism. Symptomatic septal defect are loudest at the lower left sternal 
mitral valve disease that fails to respond to treatment edge. Inspiration accentuates the murmur of tricuspid 
requires valve surgery (repair or replacement) or, in regurgitation because the increased venous return to 
selected cases of mitral stenosis, percutaneous the right side of the heart increases the regurgitant 
valvuloplasty. Symptomatic aortic valve disease always volume. Mitral valve prolapse may also produce a 
requires consideration for valve replacement pansystolic murmur but, more commonly, prolapse 

occurs in mid-systole, producing a click followed by 
a late-systolic murmur.

Early diastolic murmurs are high pitched and start 
timed according to the phase of systole or diastole immediately after the second heart sound, fading 
during which they are audible. It is inadequate to away in mid-diastole. They are caused by regurgita-
describe the timing of a murmur as systolic or diastolic tion through incompetent aortic and pulmonary 
without more specific reference to the length of the valves and are best heard using the diaphragm of 
murmur and the phase of systole or diastole during the stethoscope while the patient leans forward. 
which it is heard: systolic murmurs are mid-systolic, The early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation 
pansystolic or late systolic; diastolic murmurs are radiates from the aortic area to the left sternal edge, 



SECTION Three
203

Cardiovascular system ﻿
where it is usually easier to hear, in maintained 
expiration with the patient leaning forward. Pul- The electrocardiogram
monary regurgitation is loudest at the pulmonary The electrocardiogram (ECG) records the electrical 
area. Mid-diastolic murmurs are caused by turbulent activity of the heart at the skin surface. A good-quality 
flow through the atrioventricular valves. They start 12-lead ECG is essential for the evaluation of almost 
after valve opening, relatively late after the second all cardiac patients.
sound, and continue for a variable period during 
mid-diastole. Mitral stenosis is the principal cause 
of a mid-diastolic murmur and is best heard at the Electrophysiology
cardiac apex using the bell of the stethoscope while 
the patient lies on the left side. Increased flow across Generation of electrical activity
a non-stenotic mitral valve occurs in ventricular septal The stimulus for every normal ventricular contraction 
defect and mitral regurgitation and may produce a (sinus beat) begins with depolarization of an area of 
mid-diastolic murmur. In severe aortic regurgitation, specialized conducting tissue high in the right atrium 
preclosure of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve called the sinoatrial (SA) node. The depolarization 
by the regurgitant jet may produce mitral turbulence spreads through the walls of the atria, causing contrac-
associated with a mid-diastolic murmur (Austin Flint tion of the atrial muscle before reaching another area 
murmur). A mid-diastolic murmur at the lower left of specialized conducting tissue in the lower part of 
sternal edge, accentuated by inspiration, is caused by the right atrium called the atrioventricular (AV) node. 
tricuspid stenosis and also by conditions that increase Conduction through the AV node is relatively slow 
tricuspid flow (e.g. atrial septal defect, tricuspid which allows atrial contraction to be completed and 
regurgitation). the ventricles to fill before depolarization travels 

In mitral or tricuspid stenosis, atrial systole produces down the bundle of His and then into the left and 
a presystolic murmur immediately before the first right bundle branches. The left bundle branch divides 
heart sound. The murmur is perceived as an accentua- further into the left anterior fascicle and the left 
tion of the mid-diastolic murmur associated with posterior fascicle. From here, the depolarization 
these conditions. Because presystolic murmurs are spreads through the Purkinje fibres in the ventricular 
generated by atrial systole, they do not occur in muscle which stimulates ventricular contraction. 
patients with atrial fibrillation. Once ventricular contraction has occurred, the muscle 

Continuous murmurs are heard during systole and cells repolarize and the ventricles relax to allow 
diastole and are uninterrupted by valve closure. The ventricular filling to occur.
commonest cardiac cause is patent ductus arteriosus, The wave of depolarization that spreads through 
in which flow from the high-pressure aorta to the the heart during each cardiac cycle has vector proper-
low-pressure pulmonary artery continues throughout ties defined by its direction and magnitude. The net 
the cardiac cycle, producing a murmur over the base direction of the wave changes continuously during 
of the heart which, though continuously audible, is each cardiac cycle and the ECG deflections change 
loudest at end systole and diminishes during diastole. accordingly, being positive as the wave approaches 
Ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm also produces the recording electrode and negative as it moves 
a continuous murmur. away. Electrodes orientated along the axis of the wave 

record larger deflections than those oriented at right 
Friction rubs and venous hums angles. Nevertheless, the size of the deflections is 

determined principally by the magnitude of the wave, 
A friction rub occurs in pericarditis. It is best heard which is a function of muscle mass. Thus the ECG 
in maintained expiration with the patient leaning deflection produced by depolarization of the atria (P 
forward as a high-pitched scratching noise audible wave) is smaller than that produced by the depolariza-
during any part of the cardiac cycle and over any tion of the more muscular ventricles (QRS complex). 
part of the left precordium. A continuous venous Ventricular repolarization produces the T wave.
hum at the base of the heart reflects hyperkinetic 
jugular venous flow. It is particularly common in Inscription of the QRS complex
infants and usually disappears on lying flat. The ventricular depolarization vector can be resolved 

into two components:
Finishing the cardiovascular examination 1	 Septal depolarization – spreads from left to 
The assessment of the cardiovascular system should right across the septum.
be concluded with the examination of the abdomen 2	 Ventricular free wall depolarization – spreads 
for organomegaly (hepatomegaly in heart failure, from endocardium to epicardium.
splenomegaly in infective endocarditis and renal Left ventricular depolarization dominates the second 
abnormalities in hypertension) and abdominal aortic vector component, the resultant direction of which 
aneurysm, auscultation of the chest bases for crackles is from right to left. Thus electrodes orientated to 
related to impaired LV function and urinalysis for the left ventricle record a small negative deflection 
proteinuria and haematuria. (Q wave) as the septal depolarization vector moves 



204 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
Atrial lead: aVR Analysis of the ECG

Heart rate
The ECG is usually recorded at a paper speed of 

1 2 25 mm/s. Thus each large square (5 mm) represents 
Left ventricular
lead: 1, aVL, 0.20 s. The heart rate (bpm) is conveniently calculated 

V4–V6 by counting the number of large squares between 
consecutive R waves and dividing this into 300. This 

Right ventricular method assumes that the heart rate is regular and 
lead: V1 the distance between successive QRS complexes is 

Figure 13.9  Inscription of the QRS complex. The septal constant. An alternative, quick method is to use the 
depolarization vector (1) produces the initial deflection of the  ‘rhythm strip’ that is printed at the bottom of most 
QRS complex. The ventricular free-wall depolarization vector (2) standard ECG recordings. This is a longer recording 
produces the second deflection, which is usually more pronounced. of a particular lead and is included in the printout 
Lead aVR is orientated towards the cavity of the left ventricle and to help with the diagnosis of rhythm disorders. A 
records an entirely negative deflection. rhythm strip is a 10-second recording; counting the 

number of QRS complexes in a 10-second rhythm 
strip and multiplying by 6 will give the heart rate in 

away, followed by a large positive deflection (R wave) beats per minute.
as the ventricular depolarization vector approaches. 
The sequence of deflections for electrodes orientated Rhythm
towards the right ventricle is in the opposite direction 
(Fig. 13.9). In normal sinus rhythm, P waves precede each QRS 

Any positive deflection is termed an R wave. A complex and the rhythm is regular. Absence of P 
negative deflection before the R wave is termed a Q waves and an irregular rhythm indicate atrial 
wave (this must be the first deflection of the complex), fibrillation.
whereas a negative deflection following the R wave 
is termed an S wave. Electrical axis

Evaluation of the frontal place QRS axis is described 
Electrical axis above.
Because the mean direction of the ventricular depo-
larization vector (the electrical axis) shows a wide P-wave morphology
range of normality, there is corresponding variation The duration should not exceed 0.10 s; prolongation 
in QRS patterns consistent with a normal ECG. Thus indicates left atrial enlargement, often the result of 
correct interpretation of the ECG must take account mitral valve disease or left ventricular failure. Tall-
of the electrical axis. The frontal plane axis is deter- peaked ‘pulmonary’ P waves indicate right atrial 
mined by identifying the limb lead in which the net enlargement, caused usually by pulmonary hyperten-
QRS deflection (positive and negative) is least pro- sion and right ventricular failure.
nounced. This lead must be at right angles to the 
frontal plane electrical axis, which is defined using PR interval
an arbitrary hexaxial reference system (Fig. 13.10). The normal duration of the PR interval is 0.12-0.20 s 

measured from the onset of the P wave to the first 
Normal 12-lead ECG deflection of the QRS complex. Prolongation indicates 
The normal 12-lead ECG is illustrated in Fig. 13.11. delayed atrioventricular conduction (first-degree heart 
Leads I–III are the standard bipolar leads, which each block). Shortening indicates rapid conduction through 
measure the potential difference between two limbs: an accessory pathway bypassing the atrioventricular 
■	 Lead I: left arm to right arm. node (Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome).
■	 Lead II: left leg to right arm.
■	 Lead III: left leg to left arm. QRS morphology

The remaining leads are unipolar, connected to a The QRS duration should not exceed 0.12 s. Prolonga-
limb (aVR to aVF) or to the chest wall (V1–V6). tion indicates slow ventricular depolarization due to 
Because the orientation of each lead to the wave of bundle branch block (Fig. 13.12), pre-excitation 
depolarization is different, the direction and magnitude (WPW syndrome), ventricular tachycardia or 
of ECG deflections is also different in each lead. hypokalaemia.
Nevertheless, the sequence of deflections (P wave, Exaggerated QRS deflections indicate ventricular 
QRS complex, T wave) is identical. In some patients, hypertrophy (Fig. 13.13). The voltage criteria for left 
a small U wave can be seen following the T wave. ventricular hypertrophy are fulfilled when the sum 
Its orientation (positive or negative) is the same as of the S and R wave deflections in leads V1 and 
the T wave but its cause is unknown. V6 exceeds 35 mm (3.5 mV). Right ventricular 



SECTION Three
205

Cardiovascular system ﻿

–90° I aVR

–30° I aVR
ll aVL

ll aVL

lll aVF

A lll aVF

–
– –

–90 B
–120 –60 0° I aVR

aVR+ +aVL
–150 30

ll aVL
– +180 0 +I

+150 +30
– – lll aVF

+120 +60
+90 C

+III +II
+aVF +30° I aVR

I aVR I aVR ll aVL
I aVR

ll
aVL

ll
aVL ll aVL lll aVF

D
lll aVF

lll aVF lll aVF

G +120° F +90° E +60°

Figure 13.10  Mean frontal QRS axis. This is the mean direction of the left ventricular depolarization vector in those leads (I–aVF) that lie 
in the frontal plane of the heart. It lies at right angles to the lead in which the net QRS deflexion is least pronounced. It is quantified using 
a hexaxial reference system. The QRS axis shows a wide range of normality from −30° to 90°. Thus despite the different ECG patterns in 
this illustration, only recordings (A) and (G) are abnormal, owing to left and right axis deviation, respectively. 

hypertrophy causes tall R waves in the right ventricular the duration of electrical systole (mechanical systole 
leads (V1 and V2). A dominant R wave in lead V1 starts between the QRS complex and the T wave). 
can also be caused by right bundle branch block, The QT interval (0.35-0.45 s) is very rate sensitive, 
posterior myocardial infarction, WPW syndrome and shortening as heart rate increases. A commonly used 
dextrocardia. Diminished QRS deflections occur in way to correct the QT interval (the so-called QTc) 
myxoedema and also when pericardial effusion or involves dividing the measured QT interval by the 
obesity electrically insulates the heart. The presence square root of the RR interval in seconds. As an 
of pathological Q waves (duration >0.04 s) usually example, at 60 bpm, the RR interval would be 1 
indicates previous myocardial infarction. second – the QTc would be equal to QT/√1. Abnor-

mal prolongation of the QT interval predisposes to 
QT interval ventricular arrhythmias and may be congenital or 
The QT interval is measured from the onset of the occur in response to hypokalaemia, rheumatic fever 
QRS complex to the end of the T wave and represents or drugs (e.g. quinidine, amiodarone, tricyclic 



206 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

I aVR V1 V4

II aVI V2 V5

III aVF V3 V6

Figure 13.11  Standard 12-lead ECG. This is a normal recording. The QRS deflections are equiphasic in lead aVF. This is at right angles 
to lead I (see Fig. 13.10), which is dominantly positive. The frontal plane QRS axis is, therefore, 0°. The square wave calibration signal is 
1 mV. 

LBBB T-wave morphology
The orientation of the T wave should be directionally 
similar to the QRS complex. Thus T-wave inversion 
is normal in leads with dominantly negative QRS 
complexes (aVR, V1 and sometimes lead III). Patho-
logical T-wave inversion occurs as a non-specific 
response to various stimuli (e.g. viral infection, 

A
hypothermia). More important causes of T-wave 
inversion are ventricular hypertrophy, myocardial 

RBBB ischaemia and myocardial infarction. Exaggerated 
peaking of the T wave is the earliest ECG change in 
ST elevation myocardial infarction. It also occurs in 
hyperkalaemia.

B Clinical applications of ECG
I V1 V6 Diagnosis of coronary heart disease

Figure 13.12  Bundle branch block. (A) Left bundle branch block 
(LBBB). The entire sequence of ventricular depolarization is The territories supplied by the three major coronary 
abnormal, resulting in a broad QRS complex with large slurred or arteries, although variable, are highly circumscribed, 
notched R waves in I and V6. (B) Right bundle branch block the left anterior descending artery supplying the 
(RBBB). Right ventricular depolarization is delayed, resulting in a anterior wall, the circumflex artery the lateral wall 
broad QRS complex with an ‘rSR’ pattern in V1 and prominent S and the right coronary artery the inferior wall of the 
waves in I and V6. left ventricle. The regional distribution of coronary 

flow has important implications for electrocardiog-
antidepressants). Shortening of the QT interval is raphy (and diagnostic imaging), because patients with 
caused by hyperkalaemia and digoxin therapy. coronary heart disease show regional electrocardio-
ST segment morphology graphic (or wall motion) abnormalities and patients 

with diffuse myocardial disease (e.g. cardiomyopathy) 
Minor ST elevation reflecting early repolarization show more widespread changes.
may occur as a normal variant (Fig. 13.14), particularly 
in subjects of African or West Indian origin. Pathologi-
cal elevation (>2.0 mm above the isoelectric line) Stable angina
occurs in acute myocardial infarction, variant angina The ECG is often normal in patients with stable 
and pericarditis. Horizontal ST depression indicates angina unless there is a history of myocardial infarc-
myocardial ischaemia. Other important causes of ST tion, when pathological Q waves or T-wave inversion 
depression are digoxin therapy and hypokalaemia. may be present.



SECTION Three
207

Cardiovascular system ﻿
V1 V4 Figure 13.13  Ventricular hypertrophy.  

(A) Left ventricular hypertrophy. The QRS 
voltage deflections are exaggerated such 
that the sum of S and R waves in V1 and 
V6, respectively, exceeds 35 mm. T-wave 
inversion in V5 and V6 indicates left 

V2 V5 ventricular ‘strain’. (B) Right ventricular 
hypertrophy. Prominent R waves in V1 and 
V2 associated with T-wave inversion are 
shown. 

V3 V6

A

V1 V4

V2 V5

V3 V6

B

false-positive or false-negative results being common 
Exercise stress testing when the pretest probability of coronary disease is 
The patient is usually exercised on a treadmill, the very low (as in young women) or very high (as in 
speed and slope of which can be adjusted to increase elderly patients with typical symptoms), respectively. 
the workload gradually. In patients with coronary Non-invasive imaging modalities (see later: magnetic 
artery disease, exercise-induced increases in myocardial resonance perfusion imaging, stress echocardiography, 
oxygen demand may outstrip oxygen delivery through CT coronary angiography) have higher rates of 
the atheromatous arteries, resulting in regional diagnostic accuracy and are now preferred in the 
ischaemia. This causes planar or downsloping ST- assessment of patients with suspected coronary artery 
segment depression, with reversal during recovery disease, where available. The exercise ECG also 
(Fig. 13.15). The ready availability of the exercise provides prognostic information in patients who are 
test means that it is one of the most widely used known to have coronary artery disease: an increased 
tests for evaluating the patient with chest pain but risk of myocardial infarction or sudden death is 
its diagnostic accuracy is limited to about 70%, indicated by ST depression very early during exercise, 



208 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
ST elevation

Normal Early Acute Pericarditis Hypothermia
repolarization infarction (J wave)

ST depression

Normal Tachycardia Ischaemia Digoxin effect Hypokalaemia
(J point depression)

Figure 13.14  ST segment morphology: common causes of ST segment elevation and depression. Note that depression of the J point 
(junction between the QRS complex and ST segment) is physiological during exertion and does not signify myocardial ischaemia. Planar 
depression of the ST segment, on the other hand, is strongly suggestive of myocardial ischaemia. 

Rest Peak Recovery
I aVR I aVR I aVR

II aVL II aVL II aVL

III III III
aVF aVF aVF

Figure 13.15  Exercise ECG. Ischaemic changes in inferior standard leads (II, III and aVF). At rest, the ST segments are isoelectric. 
Exercise causes tachycardia and provokes 3 mm of downsloping ST depression in leads II, III and aVF. The changes reverse during 
recovery. The findings suggest exertional ischaemia affecting the inferior wall of the heart. The probability of coronary artery disease  
is high. 



SECTION Three
209

Cardiovascular system ﻿
by an exertional fall in blood pressure or by exercise- syndrome or unstable angina. It therefore follows 
induced ventricular arrhythmias. In these cases, urgent that acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina 
coronary angiography is required. may be associated with a completely normal ECG 

or with ST depression (Fig. 13.16) or T-wave changes, 
Acute coronary syndromes the diagnosis depending on the presence or absence 
Acute myocardial infarction and unstable angina of raised troponins.
present similarly with unprovoked – often severe – In STEMI, the evolution of ECG changes is char-
ischaemic cardiac pain. Reliable differentiation acteristic, although it may be aborted by timely 
between the acute coronary syndromes on clinical reperfusion therapy (thrombolysis or primary stent-
grounds cannot be made and requires measurement ing). Peaking of the T wave followed by ST segment 
of cardiac biomarkers, in particular troponin I or T elevation occurs during the first hour of pain (Fig. 
(see below), 12 hours after the onset of symptoms, 13.17). The changes are regional, and reciprocal ST 
and observation of the 12-lead ECG. The combination depression may be seen in the opposite ECG leads. 
of typical symptoms plus raised troponins is diagnostic Usually a pathological Q wave develops during 
of myocardial infarction, which is categorized as ST the following 24 hours and persists indefinitely. The 
elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) or non-ST ST segment returns to the isoelectric line within 
elevation myocardial infarction (non-STEMI) by 2-3 days, and T-wave inversion may occur. The ECG 
the ECG findings. Typical symptoms unassociated is a useful indicator of infarct location. Changes 
with either troponin release or ST elevation are in leads II, III and aVF indicate inferior infarction 
diagnosed as troponin-negative acute coronary (Fig. 13.18), whereas changes in leads V1–V6 indicate 

I* aVR* V1* V4*

II* aVL* V2* V5*

III* aVF* V3* V6*

Figure 13.16  Unstable angina or non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (depending on troponin release). 12-lead ECG shows planar/
downsloping ST depression in the inferolateral territory. 

1 12 24 48

Hours after onset of chest pain

Figure 13.17  Acute myocardial infarction: evolution of ECG changes. Elevation of the ST segment occurs during the first hour of chest 
pain. The Q wave develops during the subsequent 24 hours and usually persists indefinitely. Within a day of the attack, the ST segment 
usually returns to the isoelectric line and T-wave inversion may occur. 



210 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

I aVR V1 V4

II aVL V2 V5

III aVF V3 V6

Figure 13.18  Acute inferolateral infarction. ECG 2 hours after the onset of chest pain. Typical ST elevation in leads II, III and aVF is 
diagnostic of inferior myocardial infarction. ST elevation in leads V4-V6 indicates lateral extension. There is reciprocal ST depression in lead 
aVL. Prominent R waves associated with ST depression in leads V1 and V2 indicate posterior wall infarction. This pattern may reflect 
occlusion of the right coronary artery or a dominant circumflex coronary artery. 

I aVR V1 V4

II aVL V2 V5

III aVF V3 V6

Figure 13.19  Acute anterior infarction. ECG 1 hour after the onset of chest pain. Typical ST elevation in leads V2–V5 is diagnostic of 
anterior myocardial infarction. Additional ST elevation in standard leads I and aVL indicates lateral extension of the infarct. This pattern 
usually reflects proximal occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary artery. 

anteroseptal (V1–V3) or anterolateral (V1–V6) infarc- present) should also be obtained. In patients with 
tion (Fig. 13.19). When the infarct is located poste- paroxysmal arrhythmias, the frequency and severity 
riorly, ECG changes may be difficult to detect, but of symptoms determine which technique is used for 
dominant R waves in leads V1 and V2 often develop electrocardiographic documentation.
(see Fig. 13.18).

Detection of cardiac arrhythmias In-hospital ECG monitoring
Patients who have had out-of-hospital cardiac arrest 

Electrocardiographic documentation of the arrhythmia or severe, arrhythmia-induced heart failure should 
should be obtained prior to instituting treatment. In undergo continuous ECG monitoring in hospital 
patients with sustained arrhythmias, a 12-lead record- under the surveillance of staff trained in the recogni-
ing at rest is usually diagnostic, but a long continuous tion and treatment of arrhythmia. Patients with acute 
recording of the lead showing the clearest P wave (if myocardial infarction should undergo ECG monitoring 



SECTION Three
211

Cardiovascular system ﻿
1 sec 1 mV = 1.8 mm

16:04:00

16:05:30

16:07:00

16:08:30

16:10:00

16:11:30

16:13:00

16:14:30

16:16:00

16:17:30

Figure 13.20  Ventricular tachycardia: Holter recording. When tachycardias are paroxysmal in nature, continuous ECG monitoring is often 
necessary to document the arrhythmia. Here a Holter recording illustrates a long burst of rapid VT lasting a total of 6 minutes. Preceding 
the VT there is second-degree heart block (arrows). 

for 24 hours, after which time the risk of ventricular 24-hour ECG. The availability of portable cassette 
arrhythmia falls dramatically. recorders allows this to be performed as an outpatient. 

Analysis of the tape identifies any cardiac arrhythmias 
Ambulatory (Holter) ECG monitoring that occurred during the monitoring period (Fig. 
Patients with frequent palpitation or dizzy attacks 13.20). A patient diary allows correlation between 
are commonly investigated by means of an ambulatory symptoms and heart rhythm.



212 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Patient-activated ECG recording toxic stimuli such as caffeine, alcohol and cigarette 
For patients with infrequent symptoms, the detection smoking. They are caused by the premature discharge 
rate with 24-hour ambulatory monitoring is low and of an atrial ectopic focus; an early and often bizarre 
patient-activated recorders are more useful. The P wave is essential for the diagnosis. The premature 
patient can keep the recorder for several weeks and impulse enters and depolarizes the sinus node such 
activate it when symptoms occur. Rhythm strips are that a partially compensatory pause occurs before 
stored for later analysis. the next sinus beat during resetting of the sinus node.

Implantable loop recording Atrial fibrillation
Patients in whom there is clinical suspicion of serious Prevalence increases with age and it is common in 
arrhythmia but whose symptoms occur less than once hypertensive heart disease, mitral valve disease, 
a month pose particular diagnostic difficulty. In this thyrotoxicosis and left ventricular failure. It can be 
group, a miniaturized recording device can be precipitated by pneumonia, major surgery and by 
implanted subcutaneously using local anaesthetic and various toxic stimuli, particularly alcohol. Atrial 
interrogated electronically through the skin in the activity is chaotic and mechanically ineffective. 
event of symptoms. P waves are therefore absent and replaced by irregular 

fibrillatory waves (rate 400-600/min). The long 
Exercise testing refractory period of the atrioventricular node ensures 
The ECG recorded during exercise may be helpful that only some of the atrial impulses are conducted, 
when there is a history of exertional palpitation. producing an irregular ventricular rate of 130-200 bpm. 
Arrhythmias provoked by ischaemia or increased If the atrioventricular node is diseased, the ventricular 
sympathetic activity are more likely to be detected rate is slower, but in the presence of a rapidly conduct-
during exercise. ing accessory pathway in WPW syndrome, dangerous 

ventricular rates above 300 bpm may occur.
Tilt testing
When malignant vasovagal syndrome is suspected, Atrial flutter
ECG and blood pressure recordings during tilting Atrial flutter is less common than atrial fibrillation 
from supine to erect posture can be helpful. Abnormal but occurs under identical circumstances. Re-entry 
bradycardia or hypotension sufficient to produce mechanisms produce an atrial rate close to 300 bpm. 
presyncope or syncope indicate a ‘vasodepressor The normal atrioventricular node conducts with 2 : 1 
response’ or ‘cardioinhibitory response’, respectively, block, giving a ventricular rate of 150 bpm. Higher 
and are strongly suggestive of the diagnosis. degrees of block may reflect intrinsic disease of the 

atrioventricular node or the effects of nodal blocking 
Electrophysiological study drugs. The ECG characteristically shows sawtooth 
Electrophysiological technique requires cardiac flutter waves, which are most clearly seen when the 
catheterization with catheter-mounted electrodes. block is increased by carotid sinus pressure.
Premature stimuli are introduced into the atria or 
ventricles with a view to stimulating re-entry arrhyth- Diagnosis of nodal arrhythmias
mias. In the normal heart, sustained arrhythmias are 
rarely provoked by premature stimuli. Thus arrhythmia Nodal arrhythmias are often called supraventricular 
provocation is usually diagnostic, particularly when tachycardias (SVTs) and are usually paroxysmal 
the arrhythmia reproduces symptoms. Electrophysi- without obvious cardiac or extrinsic causes. They 
ological study can identify accessory pathways and are re-entry arrhythmias caused either by an 
areas of focal atrial or ventricular ectopy as the prelude abnormal pathway between the atrium and the 
to radiofrequency ablation of the arrhythmia atrioventricular node (atrionodal pathway) or by an 
substrate. accessory atrioventricular pathway (bundle of Kent), 

as seen in WPW syndrome. Like atrial arrhythmias, 

Diagnosis of atrial arrhythmias ventricular depolarization usually occurs by normal 
His-Purkinje pathways, producing a narrow QRS 

The ECG in atrial arrhythmias (Fig. 13.21) shows a complex which confirms the supraventricular origin 
narrow and morphologically normal QRS complex of the arrhythmia. Rate-related or pre-existing bundle 
when ventricular depolarization occurs by normal branch block, however, produces broad ventricular 
His-Purkinje pathways. Rate-related or pre-existing complexes difficult to distinguish from ventricular 
bundle branch block, however, results in broad tachycardia.
ventricular complexes that are difficult to distinguish 
from ventricular tachycardia. Atrioventricular nodal re-entry  

tachycardia (AVNRT)
Atrial ectopic beats The abnormal atrionodal pathway provides the 
Atrial ectopic beats rarely indicate heart disease. They basis for a small re-entry circuit. In sinus rhythm, 
often occur spontaneously but may be provoked by the electrocardiogram is usually normal, although 



SECTION Three
213

Cardiovascular system ﻿

A

B

C

D

Figure 13.21  Atrial arrhythmias: (A) Ectopic beats. After the fourth sinus beat there is a very early P wave which, finding the AV node 
refractory, is not conducted to the ventricle. This produces a pause before the next sinus beat, which itself is followed by a somewhat later 
atrial ectopic beat (arrow), which is conducted normally. This is followed by a sinus beat, following which the T wave is distorted by 
another early atrial ectopic beat (arrow), which is also blocked. (B) Atrial fibrillation. Note the irregular fibrillatory waves and the irregular 
ventricular response. The ventricular rate is fairly slow because the patient was treated with a β-blocker. (C) A flutter. AV conduction with 
2 : 1 block, giving a ventricular rate of about 150/min, which then gives way to 4 : 1 block. Sawtooth flutter waves at a rate of 300/min are 
clearly visible. (D) AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia (AVNRT). Often called supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), this arrhythmia causes a 
regular tachycardia, with a ventricular rate of about 180/min. 

occasionally the PR interval is short (Lown-Ganong-
Levine syndrome). During tachycardia, the rate is Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
150-250 bpm (see Fig. 13.21). The arrhythmia is Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, a congenital dis-
usually self-limiting. Sustained AVNRT will some- order which affects 0.12% of the population, is caused 
times respond to carotid sinus pressure. If this fails, by an accessory pathway (bundle of Kent) between 
intravenous adenosine or verapamil are usually the atria and the ventricles. During sinus rhythm, 
effective by blocking the re-entry circuit within the atrial impulses conduct more rapidly through the 
atrioventricular node. Antitachycardia pacing or direct accessory pathway than the atrioventricular node, 
current cardioversion may also be used. Many patients such that the initial phase of ventricular depolarization 
are now being treated by catheter ablation to destroy occurs early (pre-excitation) and spreads slowly 
the abnormal atrionodal pathway and avoid the need through the ventricles by abnormal pathways. This 
for long-term drug therapy (see below). produces a short PR interval and slurring of the initial 



214 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

I aVR V1 V4

II aVL V2 V5

III aVF V3 V6

Figure 13.22  WPW syndrome: 12-lead ECG. Ventricular pre-excitation is reflected on the surface ECG by a short PR interval and a slurred 
upstroke to the QRS complex (δ wave). The remainder of the QRS complex is normal because delayed arrival of the impulse conducted 
through the AV node rapidly completes ventricular depolarization through normal His-Purkinje pathways. 

A B C Figure 13.23  WPW syndrome: re-entry tachycardia 
s recorded at fast paper speed. Just after the third 

pre-excited (broad) complex, a premature atrial pacing 
stimulus (S) initiates an impulse that is blocked in the 
bundle of Kent but conducted normally through the AV 
node, producing ventricular depolarization without 
pre-excitation. Thus the QRS complex is narrow and lacks 
a δ wave. The impulse is conducted retrogradely through 
the bundle of Kent, re-enters the proximal conducting 
system and completes the re-entry circuit, initiating a 
self-sustaining orthodromic re-entry tachycardia (last 

s three complexes). 

QRS deflection (δ wave). The remainder of ventricular impulses rapidly to the ventricles, it may result in 
depolarization, however, is rapid because the delayed ventricular fibrillation and sudden death. Digoxin 
arrival of the impulse conducted through the atrio- (and to a lesser extent verapamil) should be avoided 
ventricular node rapidly completes ventricular because it shortens the refractory period of the acces-
depolarization by normal His-Purkinje pathways (Fig. sory pathway and can heighten the risk. Patients with 
13.22). Cardiac arrhythmias affect about 60% of dangerous accessory pathways of this type require 
patients with WPW syndrome and are usually re- catheter ablation of the pathway. Ablation therapy 
entrant (rate 150-250 bpm) triggered by an atrial also cures AVNRT and is the treatment of choice in 
premature beat. In most patients, the re-entry patients with frequent attacks.
arrhythmia is ‘orthodromic’, with anterograde conduc-
tion through the atrioventricular node and retrograde 
conduction through the accessory pathway (atrio- Diagnosis of ventricular arrhythmias
ventricular re-entry tachycardia (AVRT), Fig. 13.23). 
This results in a narrow complex tachycardia (without Ventricular premature beats
pre-excitation) that is indistinguishable from AVNRT. Ventricular premature beats may occur in normal 
Occasionally, the re-entry circuit is in the opposite individuals, either spontaneously or in response to 
direction (‘antidromic’), producing a very broad, toxic stimuli such as caffeine or sympathomimetic 
pre-excited tachycardia. drugs. They are caused by the premature discharge 

Patients with WPW syndrome are more prone than of a ventricular ectopic focus that produces an early 
the general population to atrial fibrillation. If the and broad QRS complex (Fig. 13.24). The premature 
accessory pathway is able to conduct the fibrillatory impulse may be conducted backwards into the atria, 



SECTION Three
215

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.24  Multifocal, ventricular ectopic beats. Frequent broad complex ectopic beats are seen early after the sinus beats. Note, 
however, that the ectopic beats have two different morphologies, indicating that they arise from different foci. Note also that the coupling 
interval (interval between QRS complex and ectopic beat) is identical for beats arising from any particular focus. 

Figure 13.25  Paroxysmal AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia. This Holter recording shows sinus rhythm giving way to a broad complex 
tachycardia. However, this is clearly the result of temporary bundle branch block because it converts spontaneously to a narrow complex 
tachycardia, confirming that the arrhythmia is junctional, not ventricular, in origin. 

I aVR V1 V4

II aVL V2 V5

III aVF V3 V6

Figure 13.26  Ventricular tachycardia: 12-lead ECG. The recording shows a broad complex tachycardia. The following features suggest  
or confirm the ventricular origin of the tachycardia: very broad QRS complex (>140 ms); extreme right axis deviation; atrioventricular 
dissociation – note the dissociated P waves in lead V1; the ‘rSR’ complex in V1. 

producing a retrograde P wave, but penetration of and junctional tachycardias which have a narrow 
the sinus node is rare. Thus, resetting of the sinus QRS complex, although differential diagnosis may 
node does not usually occur and there is a compensa- be more difficult for atrial or junctional tachycardias 
tory pause before the next sinus beat. with a broad QRS complex caused by rate-related 

or pre-existing bundle branch block (Fig. 13.25). 
Ventricular tachycardia Nevertheless, ventricular tachycardia can usually be 
Ventricular tachycardia is defined as three or more identified by careful scrutiny of the 12-lead ECG 
consecutive ventricular beats at a rate above 120 per (Fig. 13.26). Support for the diagnosis is provided 
minute. Ventricular depolarization inevitably occurs by a very broad QRS complex (>140 ms), extreme 
slowly by abnormal pathways, producing a broad left or right axis deviation, concordance of the QRS 
QRS complex. This distinguishes it from most atrial deflections in V1–V6 (either all positive or all negative) 



216 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

A

B

Figure 13.27  (A) Ventricular tachycardia: AV dissociation. P waves (arrow) can be seen ‘marching through’ the tachycardia, confirming 
its ventricular origin. The tachycardia is interrupted by a narrow capture beat. (B) Ventricular tachycardia (VT): fusion. In this example, VT 
is initiated by a very early ventricular ectopic beat (morphologically similar to the previous isolated ectopic beat) and is interrupted by a 
fusion beat (arrow), confirming the ventricular origin of the tachycardia. 

and configurational features of the QRS complex, Box 13.16  Sinoatrial disease
including an ‘rSR’ complex in V1 and a QS complex 
in V6. Confirmation of the diagnosis is provided by Typical patient
any evidence of AV dissociation: either P waves, at ■	 Elderly, often with no previous cardiac history
a slower rate than the QRS complexes, ‘marching Causes
through’ the tachycardia (Fig. 13.27A), or ventricular 

■
capture and/or fusion beats, in which the dissociated 	 Acute: myocardial infarction, coronary artery disease, 

atrial rhythm penetrates the ventricle by conduction drugs (e.g. β-blockers, digoxin), hypothermia, atrial 

through the AV node and interrupts the tachycardia, surgery
■

producing a normal ventricular complex (capture, 	 Chronic: idiopathic fibrotic disease, congenital heart 

Fig. 13.27A) or, more commonly, a broad hybrid disease, ischaemic heart disease, amyloid

complex (fusion) that is part sinus and part ventricular Major symptoms
in origin (Fig. 13.27B). Torsades de pointes, a broad ■	 Intermittent syncopal or presyncopal attacks
complex tachycardia with changing wavefronts, also ■	 Patients may also complain of exertional fatigue 
provides unequivocal evidence of ventricular tachy- (chronotropic incompetence) or palpitations 
cardia and is particularly characteristic of the (tachycardia-bradycardia syndrome)
arrhythmia that complicates long QT syndrome, often Major signs
resulting in sudden death. The syndrome may be 

■
inherited as an autosomal dominant (Romano-Ward 	 Often none

■
syndrome) or as an autosomal recessive (Lange-Nielsen 	 Sometimes sinus bradycardia or slow atrial fibrillation
syndrome) trait when it is associated with congenital Diagnosis
deafness. Another important cause of Torsade de ■	 ECG: often normal. May show sinus bradycardia or slow 
pointes is the use of drugs (antiarrhythmics and others atrial fibrillation
such as antipsychotic therapy) that cause prolongation ■	 Ambulatory ECG: 24-hour Holter recording may show 
of the QT interval. pauses diagnostic of sinoatrial disease

Ventricular fibrillation Comments
■	 Documentation of the sinus pauses (or very slow atrial 

Ventricular fibrillation occurs most commonly in fibrillation) during an attack of symptoms provides the 
severe myocardial ischaemia, either with or without most robust diagnostic information
frank infarction. It is a completely disorganized 
arrhythmia characterized by irregular fibrillatory 
waves with no discernible QRS complexes. There is 
no effective cardiac output and death is inevitable the P wave. The spontaneous discharge of the normal 
unless resuscitation with direct current defibrillation sinus node is influenced by a variety of neurohumoral 
is instituted rapidly. factors, particularly vagal and sympathetic activity, 

which respectively slow and quicken the heart rate. 
Diagnosis of sinoatrial disease In sinoatrial disease (Fig. 13.28 and Box 13.16), sinus 

node discharge may be abnormally slow, blocked 
Sinus node discharge is not itself visible on the surface (with failure to activate atrial depolarization) or 
ECG, but the atrial depolarization it triggers produces absent altogether. Under these circumstances, the 



SECTION Three
217

Cardiovascular system ﻿

A

B

C

Figure 13.28  Sinoatrial disease. (A) Sinus arrest with late junctional escape. After the second sinus beat there is a long pause, 
interrupted by a single junctional escape beat, before sinus rhythm is re-established. (B) Sinoatrial block. Pauses after the second and 
fourth complexes are the result of sinoatrial block, which has prevented sinus impulses from depolarizing the atrium. No P waves are seen 
but, because the sinus discharge continues uninterrupted, the pauses are each a precise multiple of the preceding PP interval. Sinoatrial 
block is probably rare. (C) Bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome. A slow junctional rhythm gives way to rapid atrial fibrillation. 

sinus rate may be very slow, the atrium may fibrillate, by an escape beat from a ‘junctional’ focus in the 
or pacemaker function may be assumed by foci lower bundle of His.
in the atrium, the atrioventricular node or the His-
Purkinje conducting tissue in the ventricles. The Bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome
intrinsic rate of these ‘escape’ pacemaker foci is slower In bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome, atrial brady-
than the normal sinus rate. cardias are interspersed by paroxysmal tachyarrhyth-

mias, usually atrial fibrillation. Nevertheless, it is the 
Sinus bradycardia (<50 bpm) bradycardia that usually causes symptoms, particularly 
Sinus bradycardia is physiological during sleep and dizzy attacks and blackouts.
in trained athletes but in other circumstances often 
reflects sinoatrial disease, particularly when the heart 
rate fails to increase normally with exercise. Diagnosis of atrioventricular block

In atrioventricular block (Fig. 13.29), conduction is 
Sinoatrial block delayed or completely interrupted, either in the 
If the sinus impulse is blocked and fails to trigger atrioventricular node or in the bundle branches (Box 
atrial depolarization, a pause occurs in the ECG. No 13.17). When conduction is merely delayed (e.g. 
P wave is seen during the pause owing to the absence first-degree atrioventricular block, bundle branch 
of atrial depolarization. The electrically ‘silent’ sinus block), the heart rate is unaffected. When conduction 
discharge, however, continues uninterrupted. Thus, is completely interrupted, however, the heart rate 
the pause is always a precise multiple of preceding may slow sufficiently to produce symptoms. In second-
PP intervals. Sinoatrial block that cannot be abolished degree atrioventricular block, failure of conduction 
by atropine-induced vagal inhibition usually indicates is by definition intermittent, and if sufficient sinus 
sinoatrial disease, particularly with pauses longer than impulses are conducted to maintain an adequate 
2 seconds. ventricular rate, symptoms may be avoided. In third-

degree atrioventricular block there is complete failure 
Sinus arrest of conduction and continuing ventricular activity 
Failure of sinus node discharge produces a pause on depends on the emergence of an escape rhythm. If 
the ECG that bears no relation to the preceding PP the block is within the atrioventricular node, the 
interval. Pauses longer than 2 seconds are usually escape rhythm usually arises from a focus just below 
pathological. Prolonged pauses are often terminated the node in the bundle of His (junctional escape), 



218 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 13.29  Atrioventricular conducting tissue disease. (A) 1° AV block. Delayed AV conduction causes a prolonged PR interval 
(>0.20 s). (B) 2° AV block, Wenckebach type. This is also called Mobitz type I block and occurs within the AV node. Three Wenckebach 
cycles are shown. Successive sinus beats find the AV node increasingly refractory until failure of conduction occurs. This delay permits 
recovery of nodal function and the process repeats itself. (C) 2° AV block at bundle branch level (Mobitz type II). This is standard lead I. 
Note that the PR interval of conducted beats is normal but the QRS complex shows right bundle branch block. Intermittent block in the left 
bundle results in failure of conduction of alternate P waves. (D) 3° (complete) AV block at level of AV node. In this patient with acute 
inferior myocardial infarction there is complete failure of AV conduction, as reflected by the dissociated atrial and ventricular rhythms. 
Note the regular P waves and the regular slower QRS complexes occurring independently of one another. Because block is at the level of 
the AV node, a junctional escape rhythm has taken over with a narrow QRS complex. (E) 3° (complete) AV block at bundle branch level. 
The atrial and ventricular rhythms are dissociated because none of the atrial impulses is conducted. The ECG shows regular P waves and 
regular but slower QRS complexes. Because the escape rhythm is ventricular in origin, the QRS complexes are broad and the rate is slow. 



SECTION Three
219

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.17  Causes of atrioventricular heart block
Acute
■	 Myocardial infarction AA
■	 Drugs (e.g. β-blockers, verapamil, digoxin, adenosine) SVC
■	 Surgical or catheter ablation of bundle of His PA
■	 Endocarditis complicated by aortic root abscess
Chronic
■	 Idiopathic fibrosis of both bundle branches
■	 Ischaemic heart disease
■	 Congenital heart disease RV
■	 Calcific aortic valve disease RA
■	 Chagas’ disease
■	 Infiltrative disease (amyloid, haemochromatosis) LV
■	 Granulomatous disease (sarcoid, tuberculosis)

and is often fast enough to prevent symptoms. If 
both bundle branches are blocked, however, the Figure 13.30  Normal chest X-ray: posteroanterior projection. 
escape rhythm must arise from a focus lower in the Note the heart is not enlarged (cardiothoracic ratio <50%) and  
ventricles. Ventricular escape rhythms of this type the lung fields are clear. AA, aortic arch; LV, left ventricle; PA, 

pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; SVC, 
are nearly always associated with symptoms because superior vena cava. 
they are not only very slow but also unreliable and 
may stop altogether, producing prolonged asystole.

First-degree atrioventricular block atrium is fibrillating) and regular but slower QRS 
Delayed atrioventricular conduction causes prolonga- complexes occurring independently of each other. 
tion of the PR interval (>0.20 s). Ventricular depo- When block is within the atrioventricular node (e.g. 
larization occurs rapidly by normal His-Purkinje inferior myocardial infarction, congenital atrioven-
pathways and the QRS complex is usually narrow. tricular block), a junctional escape rhythm with a 

reliable rate (40-60 bpm) takes over (see Fig. 13.29). 
Second-degree atrioventricular block:  Ventricular depolarization occurs rapidly by normal 
Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) pathways, producing a narrow QRS complex. However, 

when block is within the bundle branches (e.g. 
Mobitz type I second-degree atrioventricular block idiopathic fibrosis), there is always extensive conduct-
commonly occurs in inferior myocardial infarction. ing tissue disease. The ventricular escape rhythm is 
Successive sinus beats find the atrioventricular node slow and unreliable, with a broad QRS complex 
increasingly refractory until failure of conduction (see Fig. 13.29).
occurs. The delay permits recovery of nodal function, 
and the process may then repeat itself. The ECG Right bundle branch block
shows progressive prolongation of the PR interval, Right bundle branch block may be a congenital defect 
culminating in a dropped beat. Block is within the but is more commonly the result of organic conducting 
atrioventricular node itself and ventricular depolariza- tissue disease. Right ventricular depolarization is 
tion occurs rapidly by normal pathways. Thus the delayed, resulting in a broad QRS complex with an 
QRS complex is usually narrow. ‘rSR’ pattern in lead V1 and prominent S waves in 
Second-degree atrioventricular block:  leads I and V6.
Mobitz type II Left bundle branch block
Mobitz type II second-degree atrioventricular block Left bundle branch block always indicates organic 
indicates advanced conducting tissue disease affecting conducting tissue disease. The entire sequence of 
the bundle branches. The ECG typically shows a ventricular depolarization is abnormal, resulting in a 
normal PR interval with bundle branch block in broad QRS complex with large slurred or notched 
conducted beats and intermittent block in the other R waves in leads I and V
bundle branch, resulting in complete failure of atrio- 6.

ventricular conduction and dropped beats.

Third-degree (complete) atrioventricular block The chest X-ray
The atrial and ventricular rhythms are ‘dissociated’ Good-quality posteroanterior (PA) and lateral chest 
because none of the atrial impulses are conducted. X-rays are always helpful in the assessment of the 
Thus the ECG shows regular P waves (unless the cardiac patient (Fig. 13.30).



220 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.32  Left atrial dilatation. This is a penetrated PA chest 
Figure 13.31  Pericardial effusion with tamponade: chest X-ray. X-ray in a patient with mitral stenosis. The dilated left atrium 
There is a left hilar mass caused by carcinoma. Pericardial causes a bulge on the left heart border below the pulmonary artery 
infiltration has produced effusion and tamponade, evidenced by which is also dilated, widening of the carina and the double-
the severely enlarged and globular cardiac silhouette. Malignant density sign at the right heart border. 
disease is now the most common cause of tamponade in most 
developed countries. 

Cardiac silhouette
Although the PA chest X-ray exhibits a wide range 
of normality, the maximum diameter of the heart 
should not be more than 50% of the widest diameter 
of the thorax. Cardiac enlargement is caused either 
by dilatation of the cardiac chambers or by pericardial 
effusion (Fig. 13.31). Myocardial hypertrophy only 
affects heart size if very severe.

Ventricular dilatation
The PA chest X-ray does not reliably distinguish 
left from right ventricular dilatation. For this, the 
lateral chest X-ray is more helpful. Dilatation of 
the posteriorly located left ventricle encroaches on 
the retrocardiac space, whereas dilatation of the 
anteriorly located right ventricle encroaches on the 
retrosternal space.

Atrial dilatation
Right atrial dilatation is usually due to right ventricular 
failure, but occurs as an isolated finding in tricuspid Figure 13.33  Chest X-ray in a patient with Marfan syndrome. 
stenosis and Ebstein’s anomaly. It produces cardiac Note the dilatation of the ascending aorta. 
enlargement without specific radiographic signs.

Left atrial dilatation occurs in left ventricular failure 
and mitral valve disease (Fig. 13.32). Radiographic Localized dilatation of the proximal aorta occurs in 
signs are: aortic valve disease and produces a prominence in 
■	 Flattening and later bulging of the left heart the right upper mediastinum (Fig. 13.33). Dilatation 

border below the main pulmonary artery. of the main pulmonary artery occurs in pulmonary 
■	 Elevation of the left main bronchus, with hypertension and pulmonary stenosis and produces 

widening of the carina. a prominence below the aortic knuckle (Fig. 13.34).
■	 Appearance of the medial border of the left 

atrium behind the right side of the heart Intracardiac calcification
(double-density sign). Because the radiodensity of cardiac tissue is similar 

to that of blood, intracardiac structures can rarely be 
Vascular dilatation identified unless they are calcified. Valvular, pericardial 
Aortic dilatation caused by aneurysm or dissection may or myocardial calcification may occur, and usually 
produce widening of the entire upper mediastinum. indicates important disease of these structures. 



SECTION Three
221

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.35  Chest X-ray in acute left ventricular failure: the 
patient had severe pulmonary oedema caused by acute myocardial 
infarction. The heart is not yet enlarged, but there is prominent 
alveolar pulmonary oedema in a perihilar (‘bat’s-wing’) 
distribution. Note the bilateral pleural effusions. 

Figure 13.34  Atrial septal defect: chest X-ray. Note the 
prominent proximal pulmonary arteries and the pulmonary plethora 
reflecting increased pulmonary flow. Other lung field abnormalities

Pulmonary infarction
Localized and typically wedge-shaped areas of con-

Calcification is best appreciated on the deeply solidation are occasionally seen in pulmonary embolic 
penetrated lateral chest X-ray. disease, although more often the bronchial circulation 

protects against ischaemic damage.
Lung fields Pneumonic consolidation and abscess
Common lung field abnormalities in cardiovascular In patients with right-sided endocarditis, infected 
disease are caused either by altered pulmonary flow pulmonary emboli commonly cause septic foci within 
or by increased left atrial pressure. the lung fields.

Altered pulmonary flow Interstitial lung disease
Increments in pulmonary flow sufficient to cause In long-standing pulmonary hypertension complicating 
radiographic abnormalities are caused by left-to-right rheumatic mitral valve disease, haemosiderosis (stip-
intracardiac shunts (e.g. atrial septal defect; see Fig. pled shadowing throughout the lung fields) was once 
13.34, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arte- a common X-ray finding. It is now rarely seen.
riosus). Prominence of the vascular markings gives 
the lung fields a plethoric appearance. Reductions in Bony abnormalities
pulmonary flow, on the other hand, cause reduced Bony abnormalities are unusual in cardiovascular 
vascular markings. This may be regional (e.g. pulmo- disease, apart from coarctation of the aorta and 
nary embolism) or global (e.g. severe pulmonary thoracic outlet syndromes. In coarctation, dilated 
hypertension). bronchial collateral vessels erode the inferior aspect 
Increased left atrial pressure of the ribs to produce notches, although they are 

rarely present before adolescence. Cervical ribs may 
Increased left atrial pressure occurs in mitral stenosis compress the neurovascular bundle in the thoracic 
and left ventricular failure and produces corresponding outlet, and special thoracic outlet views are necessary 
rises in pulmonary venous and pulmonary capillary for radiographic diagnosis.
pressures. Prominence of the upper lobe veins is an 
early radiographic finding. As the left atrial and 
pulmonary capillary pressures rise above 18 mmHg, Echocardiography
transudation into the lung produces interstitial 
pulmonary oedema, characterized by prominence of Echocardiography is one of the most versatile non-
the interlobular septa, particularly at the lung bases invasive imaging techniques in clinical cardiology. As 
(Kerley B lines). Further elevation of pressure leads it does not use ionizing radiation, it is free of risk 
to alveolar pulmonary oedema, characterized by and can be employed safely throughout pregnancy. 
perihilar ‘bat’s-wing’ shadowing (Fig. 13.35). Transthoracic imaging with the transducer applied 



222 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
to the chest wall is usually satisfactory, but better the M-mode recording. By projecting a fan of echoes 
quality information is obtained via the transoesopha- in an arc of up to 80°, a 2D ‘slice’ through the 
geal approach in which the transducer is mounted heart can be obtained, the precise view depending 
on a probe and positioned in the oesophagus, directly on the location and angulation of the transducer 
behind the heart. This provides higher resolution (Fig. 13.36B).
images because there are no intervening ribs or lung 
tissue and the probe is closely applied to the posterior 
aspect of the heart. It is particularly useful for imaging Clinical applications
the left atrium, the aorta, the interatrial septum and 
prosthetic heart valves. Congenital heart disease

Echocardiography, particularly the 2D technique, has 
Principles revolutionized the diagnosis of congenital heart disease, 

in the majority of cases obviating the need for invasive 
Physics investigation by cardiac catheterization (Fig. 13.37). 
A transducer containing a piezoelectric element The relationships of the cardiac chambers and their 
converts electrical energy into an ultrasound beam connections with the great vessels are readily deter-
that is directed towards the heart. The beam is mined. Valvular abnormalities and septal defects can 
reflected when it strikes an interface between tissues also be recognized. Recent technology has permitted 
of different densities. The reflected ultrasound, or in utero fetal imaging for the antenatal diagnosis of 
echo, is converted back to electrical energy by the cardiac defects.
piezoelectric element, which permits the construction 
of an image using two basic units of information: Myocardial disease
1	 The intensity of the echoes, which defines the Echocardiography permits accurate assessment of 

density difference at tissue interfaces within  cardiac dilatation, hypertrophy and contractile func-
the heart. tion. Dilated cardiomyopathy produces ventricular 

2	 The time taken for echoes to arrive back at the dilatation with global contractile impairment (Fig. 
transducer, which defines the distance of the 13.38). This must be distinguished from the regional 
cardiac structures from the transducer. contractile impairment that follows myocardial 

Density differences within the heart are greatest infarction in patients with coronary artery disease 
between the blood-filled chambers and the myocardial (Fig. 13.39). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is char-
and valvular tissues, all of which are clearly visible acterized by thickening (hypertrophy) of the left 
on the echocardiogram. Because the depth of the ventricular myocardium, usually with disproportionate 
myocardial and valvular tissues with respect to the involvement of the interventricular septum (asym-
transducer changes constantly throughout the cardiac metric septal hypertrophy). In aortic and hypertensive 
cycle, the time taken for echo reflection changes heart disease, on the other hand, left ventricular 
accordingly. Thus, real-time imaging throughout the hypertrophy is usually symmetrical (Fig. 13.40).
cardiac cycle provides a dynamic record of cardiac 
function. Valvular disease
M-mode echocardiogram Echocardiography is of particular value for identifying 
The M-mode echocardiogram provides a unidimen- both structural and dynamic valvular abnormalities 
sional view through the heart. Continuous recording and any associated chamber dilatation or hypertrophy 
on photographic paper provides an additional time (Boxes 13.18-13.21). The severity of valvular involve-
dimension, thereby permitting appreciation of the ment in congenital, rheumatic, degenerative and 
dynamic component of the cardiac image. By conven- infective disease may thus be defined; the technique 
tion, cardiac structures closest to the transducer are is diagnostic for bicuspid aortic valve and mitral valve 
displayed at the top of the record and more distant prolapse and readily identifies valve thickening and 
structures are displayed below. Thus, on the trans calcification in rheumatic and calcific disease (Figs 
thoracic M-mode echocardiogram, anteriorly located 13.40 and 13.41). Vegetations in infective endocarditis 
(‘right-sided’) structures lie above the posteriorly can usually be visualized if they are large enough 
located (‘left-sided’) structures, but on the trans (>3 mm, Fig. 13.42). The transoesophageal approach 
oesophageal echocardiogram, the display is reversed. is usually necessary for endocarditis involving pros-
M-mode is particularly useful for measuring chamber thetic heart valves.
dimensions and left ventricular wall thickness 
and for timing events within the cardiac cycle Pericardial disease
(Fig. 13.36A). Although the echocardiogram is of little value in 

constrictive pericarditis, it is the most sensitive 
Two-dimensional echocardiogram technique available for the diagnosis of pericardial 
The two-dimensional (2D) echocardiogram provides effusion (Fig. 13.43). The effusion appears as an 
more detailed information about morphology than echo-free space distributed around the ventricles but 



SECTION Three
223

Cardiovascular system ﻿
1s  in  time marker

ECG
CW

RV

IVS
AV

MV

LV

LA

PW
A

RV

LV

LA

B

Figure 13.36  (A) M-mode echocardiography. The figure shows a sweep as the transducer is angulated from the left ventricle to the aortic 
root. (B) Transthoracic 2D echocardiography. Parasternal long-axis and apical four-chamber views are shown. The dots are a 1-cm scale. 
AV, aortic valve; CW, chest wall; IVS, interventricular septum; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral valve; PW, posterior LV wall; RV, 
right ventricle. 

ECG

RV

RA IVS

LV

PW

Figure 13.37  Atrial septal defect: 2D echocardiogram (subcostal 
view). In this view, good views of the interatrial septum can Figure 13.38  Dilated cardiomyopathy: echocardiogram. This 
usually be obtained without resorting to transoesophageal M-mode study shows severe dilatation of the left ventricular cavity 
echocardiography. Note the atrial septal defect (arrow) and the and severe global contractile impairment. The patient later 
dilatation of the right atrium (RA). underwent successful heart transplantation. 



224 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

AV

IVS

PW

Figure 13.39  Heart failure: echocardiogram. This M-mode study 
shows considerable dilatation of the left ventricle. Note that the 
interventricular septum (IVS) is almost akinetic, but the posterior 
wall (PW) is contracting normally. Regional contractile impairment 
of this type indicates coronary heart disease. The phonocardiogram 
recorded simultaneously shows normal first and second heart 
sounds and also a third heart sound (arrowed). Figure 13.40  Aortic stenosis and left ventricular hypertrophy: 2D 

echocardiogram (long-axis view). The aortic valve (AV) is grossly 
thickened and calcified. Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy is 
present (arrow). 

Box 13.18  Aortic stenosis
Typical patient
■	 Middle-aged (congenitally bicuspid valve) or elderly Box 13.19  Aortic regurgitation

(degenerative calcific disease) man or woman Typical patient
Major symptoms ■	 Young men (Marfan syndrome, etc.) or older patients 
■	 Exertional shortness of breath is usual presenting (long-standing hypertension) with dilating disease of 

symptom the aortic root
■	 Angina may also occur and, in advanced cases, Major symptoms

syncopal attacks or sudden death
■	 Exertional shortness of breath is usual presenting 

Major signs symptom
■	 Carotid pulse: slow upstroke with plateau ■	 Angina may also occur
■	 Auscultation: fourth heart sound at cardiac apex; Major signs

ejection systolic murmur at base of heart, radiating to 
■

neck. The murmur may be preceded by an ejection click 	 Carotid pulse: sharp upstroke with early diastolic 
if the valve is mobile and not heavily calcified collapse

■	 Blood pressure: systolic hypertension with wide pulse 
Diagnosis pressure
■	 ECG: left ventricular hypertrophy ■	 Auscultation: early diastolic murmur at left sternal edge. 
■	 Chest X-ray: dilatation of ascending aorta Third heart sound at cardiac apex in severe cases. Mid- 
■	 Echocardiogram: calcified immobile aortic valve with left diastolic murmur (Austin Flint) may be heard at apex 

ventricular hypertrophy. Doppler studies permit owing to preclosure of mitral valve by regurgitant jet
quantification of the severity of stenosis Diagnosis

Additional investigations ■	 ECG: left ventricular hypertrophy
■	 Cardiac catheterization is necessary to evaluate ■	 Chest X-ray: cardiac enlargement with dilatation of 

coronary arteries in patients being considered for aortic ascending aorta
valve replacement surgery ■	 Echocardiogram: often normal valve with dilated aortic 

Comments root. Doppler studies confirm regurgitant jet
■	 Aortic stenosis is now the commonest acquired valve Additional investigations

lesion in developed countries ■	 Cardiac catheterization is necessary to evaluate 
coronary arteries in older patients (age >50) being 
considered for aortic valve replacement surgery

Comments
■	 The timing of valve replacement surgery is difficult but 

should anticipate irreversible left ventricular contractile 
failure



SECTION Three
225

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.41  Mitral stenosis: 2D echocardiogram (parasternal Figure 13.42  Infective endocarditis: transoesophageal 
long-axis view). The mitral valve leaflets are densely thickened echocardiogram. Vegetation (arrow) is adherent to the aortic valve 
(arrow) and the left atrium is severely dilated. leaflet. 

Box 13.20  Mitral stenosis
Typical patient
■	 Young to middle-aged woman with a history of 

rheumatic fever in childhood
Major symptoms
■	 Exertional shortness of breath with orthopnoea in 

advanced cases
■	 Palpitations commonly signal the development of atrial 

fibrillation, which puts the patient at serious risk of 
peripheral embolism and stroke

Major signs
■	 Pulse: atrial fibrillation in many cases
■	 Auscultation: loud S1 with early diastolic opening snap, Figure 13.43  Pericardial effusion: 2D echocardiogram 

followed by low-pitched mid-diastolic murmur best (parasternal long-axis view). Note the echo-free space (arrow) 
heard at cardiac apex. If the patient is in sinus rhythm, around the heart but not behind the left atrium. 
there is presystolic accentuation of the murmur

Diagnosis
usually avoiding the potential space behind the left 

■	 ECG: atrial fibrillation usually atrium.
■	 Chest X-ray: signs of left atrial enlargement (flat left 

heart border, widening of carinal angle, and Other clinical applications
double-density sign at right heart border). Pulmonary 
congestion Intracardiac tumours, particularly myxomas (see Fig. 

■	 Echocardiogram: rheumatic mitral valve and left atrial 13.1) and thrombi (Fig. 13.44), are readily visualized 
dilatation. Doppler studies permit quantification of the by echocardiography. The transoesophageal technique 
severity of stenosis is more sensitive for identifying thrombus in the left 

atrial appendage and is also helpful for diagnosing 
Additional investigations aortic disease, such as aneurysm and dissection, as 
■	 Cardiac catheterization is necessary to evaluate it provides better views of the thoracic aorta than 

coronary arteries in patients aged >50 being considered is possible with conventional 2D echocardiography 
for mitral valve replacement surgery (Fig. 13.45).

Comments
■	 In patients with atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation with 

warfarin is mandatory to protect against stroke Stress echocardiography
Stress echocardiography is increasingly being used 
for the diagnosis of myocardial ischaemia in suspected 
coronary disease. Left ventricular imaging during 
increasing dobutamine infusion permits assessment 



226 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Box 13.21  Mitral regurgitation of regional wall motion in response to adrenergic 
stress. Decreasing systolic wall motion or wall thicken-

Typical patient ing indicates ischaemia and the need for further 
■	 Mitral valve prolapse (floppy mitral valve) causes investigation. Stress echocardiography is also used to 

regurgitation of variable severity and more commonly identify myocardial ‘viability’ in the patient with 
affects women at almost any age heart failure, and improvement in regional hypokinesis 

■	 Patients with subvalvular disease (papillary muscle in response to dobutamine infusion, indicating 
dysfunction or chordal rupture) are usually elderly men ‘hibernating’ (and hence potentially salvageable) 
or women myocardium likely to respond favourably to revas-

Major symptoms cularization by angioplasty or bypass surgery.
■	 Exertional shortness of breath with orthopnoea in 

advanced cases
■	 Palpitations commonly signal the development of atrial Doppler echocardiography

fibrillation, which puts the patient at serious risk of Doppler echocardiography permits evaluation of the 
peripheral embolism and stroke direction and velocity of blood flow within the heart 

Major signs and great vessels. It is widely used for measuring the 
■	 Pulse: often sinus rhythm, but may be atrial fibrillation severity of valvular stenosis and identifying valvular 
■	 Auscultation: pansystolic murmur at cardiac apex, regurgitation and intracardiac shunts through septal 

radiating to axilla. Often associated with third heart defects.
sound

Diagnosis
■	 ECG: atrial fibrillation, but may be normal
■	 Chest X-ray: cardiac enlargement with variable signs of 

left atrial enlargement, though these are usually less 
marked than in mitral stenosis. Pulmonary congestion in 
severe cases

■	 Echocardiogram: prolapsing (floppy) mitral valve may be 
seen; in subvalvular disease the valve often appears 
normal. Left ventricular and left atrial dilatation. 
Doppler studies confirm regurgitant jet

Additional investigations
■	 Transoesophageal echo is sometimes necessary to 

clarify the severity and mechanism of regurgitation
■	 Cardiac catheterization is necessary to evaluate 

coronary arteries in patients aged >50 years being 
considered for mitral valve replacement surgery

Comments Figure 13.44  Mitral stenosis: 2D echocardiogram (long-axis 
■	 In patients with atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation with view). The left atrium is severely dilated and a large thrombus 

warfarin is mandatory to protect against stroke (arrow) is visible, emphasizing the importance of anticoagulation 
in patients with mitral valve disease and atrial fibrillation. 

Figure 13.45  Aortic dissection: transoesophageal echocardiogram. Right panel: this long-axis transoesophageal echocardiogram reveals 
the dilated aortic root and an S-shaped flap (arrow) traversing the lumen. Left panel: same patient with colour Doppler superimposed to 
show flow in the true lumen. 



SECTION Three
227

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Principles
Physics
According to the Doppler principle, when an ultra-
sound beam is directed towards the bloodstream, LV RVOT
the frequency of the sound waves reflected from 
the blood cells is altered. The frequency shift or AO

Doppler effect is related to the direction and velocity 
of flow. If continuous-wave Doppler is used, blood LA
flow at any point along the path of the ultrasound 
beam is detected, such that a ‘clean’ Doppler 
signal from the area of interest may be difficult to 
obtain. Pulsed Doppler, however, has a range-gating 
facility that permits frequency sampling from any Figure 13.46  Mitral regurgitation: colour-flow Doppler. This is an 
specific point within the heart, preselected on the apical long-axis view of the heart showing a large jet of mitral 
echocardiogram. This lends greater precision to the regurgitation (blue) occupying most of the left atrial cavity (LA). 
technique. Nevertheless, pulsed Doppler is less able 
than continuous-wave Doppler to quantify very 
high-velocity jets, such as those that occur in aortic New developments
stenosis. In recent years, real time three-dimensional (3D) 

imaging has emerged as a powerful technique – par-
Colour-flow mapping ticularly in the assessment of valvular disease and in 

guiding percutaneous interventions such as minimally 
Colour-flow mapping has been a major technological invasive transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).
advance. Instead of the unidirectional ultrasound 
beam used in continuous-wave and pulsed Doppler 
imaging, the beam is rotated through an arc. Frequency Cardiovascular radionuclide imaging
sampling throughout the arc permits the construction 
of a colour-coded map, red indicating flow towards Principles
and blue away from the transducer. Colour-flow data 
can be superimposed on the standard 2D echocar- All radionuclide techniques require the internal 
diogram to identify precisely the patterns of flow administration of a radioisotope; the distribution of 
within the four chambers of the heart. This simplifies radioactivity in the area of interest is then imaged 
the interpretation of Doppler imaging and provides with a gamma camera. Ideally, the isotope should be 
more useful qualitative data, although it is less useful distributed homogeneously in that part of the car-
for quantitative assessment of valve gradients, which diovascular system under investigation: thus, isotopes 
requires the precision of conventional Doppler that remain in the intravascular space during imaging 
technique. are used for radionuclide angiography. In myocardial 

perfusion scintigraphy, however, isotopes taken up 
by the myocardium are required. Because of their 

Clinical applications potential toxicity, isotopes with a short half-life are 
usually used.

In paediatric cardiology, the combination of 2D 
echocardiography and colour-flow Doppler mapping Clinical applications
has made possible the ‘non-invasive’ diagnosis of a 
large majority of congenital defects, often without Radionuclide ventriculography
the need for cardiac catheterization. These techniques This method is used for assessment of ventricular 
have also revolutionized the diagnosis of valvular function. Red cells labelled with technetium-99m 
disease in all age groups. In valvular regurgitation, (99mTc) are allowed to equilibrate in the blood pool 
the retrograde flow that occurs after valve closure and the heart is then imaged under the gamma camera. 
is readily detected by Doppler echocardiography, The waxing and waning of radioactivity within the 
although only an approximate estimate of its severity ventricular chambers during diastole and systole, 
is possible (Fig. 13.46). In valvular stenosis, the peak respectively, permits the construction of a dynamic 
velocity (as opposed to the volume) of flow across ventriculogram. Left ventricular contractile function 
the valve is directly related to the degree of stenosis. can be evaluated quantitatively by calculating the 
Thus, measurement of Doppler flow velocity (ideally ejection fraction, or qualitatively by observing wall 
by continuous wave) permits quantification of the movement. In clinical practice, this has now been 
stenosis by the application of the Bernoulli equation: replaced by other techniques for the assessment of 

left ventricular function such as echocardiography 
pressure gradient = 4 × velocity2 and magnetic resonance imaging.



228 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy defects. If 201Tl is used, repeat imaging after 2-4 hours’ 
This method is used for the diagnosis and assessment rest permits the reassessment of scintigraphic defects; 
of coronary artery disease (Fig. 13.47). In an attempt those that disappear (reversible defects) indicate areas 
to provoke myocardial ischaemia the patient is of stress-induced ischaemia, while those that persist 
‘stressed’ by a standardized exercise test, an intravenous (fixed defects) indicate infarcted myocardium. If 

99m
dobutamine infusion or an intravenous adenosine Tc-labelled MIBI is used, resting images for assess-
infusion. Isotope is injected intravenously at peak ment of reversibility require a separate injection of 
stress and the heart is imaged under a gamma camera. isotope 24 hours after (or before) the stress images.
Thallium-201 (201Tl) has now given way to 99mTc-
labelled methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile (MIBI) which Positron emission tomography
provides better image quality. Isotope is distributed Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is used 
homogeneously in normally perfused myocardium, to determine myocardial ‘viability’ in patients with 
ischaemic or infarcted areas appearing as scintigraphic heart failure (see stress echocardiography, above). 

Simultaneous assessment of myocardial perfusion 
using 13N ammonia and glucose uptake using a glucose 

STRESS REDISTRIBUTION analogue permits the identification of viable but 
dysfunctional myocardium, in which perfusion is 
impaired but metabolic activity in terms of glucose 
uptake remains normal. This perfusion-metabolic 
‘mismatch’ indicates viable muscle likely to respond 
favourably to revascularization by angioplasty or 
bypass surgery.

New PET tracers, such as rubidium, can be used to 
assess myocardial perfusion. A specialist cyclotron is 
not required for this tracer, reducing the costs involved.

Pulmonary scintigraphy (radioisotope imaging)
Pulmonary scintigraphy is used for the diagnosis 
of pulmonary embolism (Fig. 13.48). The 99mTc-
labelled microspheres injected intravenously become 
trapped within the pulmonary capillaries. The normal 
pulmonary perfusion scintigram shows a homogeneous 
distribution of radioactivity throughout both lung 
fields. Pulmonary embolism causes regional impair-
ment of pulmonary flow, which results in a perfusion 
defect on the scintigram; however, the appearance 
is non-specific and occurs in many other pulmonary 
disorders, particularly chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease. Specificity is enhanced by simultaneous 
ventilation scintigraphy (a ventilation/perfusion, or 
V/Q scan). Inhaled xenon-133 (133Xe) is distributed 
homogeneously throughout the normal lung, and 
in pulmonary embolism (unlike other pulmonary 
disorders), distribution remains homogeneous. Thus, 
a scintigraphic perfusion defect not ‘matched’ by a 
ventilation defect is highly specific for pulmonary 
embolism. CT pulmonary angiography is now the 
diagnostic test of choice for pulmonary embo-
lism, but V/Q scanning is still valuable in patients 
with suspected pulmonary embolism who have 
severe renal impairment in whom X-ray contrast is 
contraindicated.

Figure 13.47  Isotope perfusion scan. These are tomographic Computed tomography
slices across the short axis of the left ventricle. A posterior wall 
defect is seen during stress, but it largely disappears during rest Principles
as isotope ‘redistributes’ into the ischaemic area. A smaller fixed 
defect is seen in the anterior wall, indicating infarction in that CT measures the attenuation of X-rays after they 
territory. have traversed body tissues. Attenuation is greatest 



SECTION Three
229

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.48  Ventilation (right) and perfusion (left) lung scans in pulmonary embolism. Contrast the homogeneous distribution of 
isotope in the ventilation scan with the regional defects in the perfusion scan. 

for tissues such as bone, which are relatively radio-
opaque, and least for tissues such as lung or fat, which 
are relatively radiolucent. From X-ray attenuation 
measurements, taken as a sensor rotates around the 
chest, cross-sectional images are constructed. Image 
resolution is excellent, and contrast injection into a 
peripheral vein opacifies the blood pool, allowing 
assessment of the coronary arteries and intracardiac 
structures. In the past, the clinical application of 
cardiac CT was limited by image acquisition times 
of up to 5 seconds, during which the constant motion 
of the heart degraded the image, and by high radiation 
doses. The current generation of ultrafast CT scanners 
with image acquisition times of less than 1 second 
provide high-resolution cardiac images in both static Figure 13.49  Aortic dissection: CT scan (Marfan syndrome).  
and video mode while radiation doses have reduced The ascending aorta is dilated and the intimal flap (arrow) clearly 
substantially. visible. This flap extends around the arch (not seen here) into the 

descending aorta, where again it is clearly visible. 

Clinical applications
CT (with contrast enhancement) diagnoses pulmonary 
embolism and aortic dissection (Fig. 13.49) with a 
sensitivity of about 95%. It is also used for accurate 
assessment of pericardial thickness in constrictive 
disease (Fig. 13.50) and in the diagnosis of cardiac 
tumours. Recently, multislice CT has emerged as a 
useful investigation for the diagnosis of coronary 
artery disease. The quantification of coronary calcifica-
tion has found application as a marker of coronary 
risk in asymptomatic or low-risk individuals; a zero 
calcium score has a high accuracy rate for the exclu-
sion of coronary artery disease. CT coronary angiog-
raphy is able to diagnose normal coronary arteries or 
mild plaque disease extremely accurately (Fig. 13.51) 
but it cannot distinguish reliably between moderate Figure 13.50  Non-calcific pericardial constriction: CT scan. 
and severe stenoses or determine the degree of stenosis There is consolidation in the right lung and severe pericardial 

thickening. The patient had pulmonary tuberculosis with 
in heavily calcified coronary segments. CT coronary pericardial involvement and presented with fever and signs of 
angiography is therefore best used in the assessment constriction. Antituberculous therapy caused regression of all 
of low- to medium-risk patients to ‘rule out’ significant symptoms and signs, although the patient is at major risk of 
obstructive coronary artery disease. Additional applica- developing constriction later as the pericardium becomes fibrotic 
tions of CT include the evaluation of graft patency and calcified. 



230 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

A B

C

Figure 13.51  CT coronary angiogram: normal study in a 42-year-old man with atypical chest pain and a family history of premature 
coronary artery disease. (A) Multiplanar reformatted image of the left anterior descending artery (arrow). (B) Multiplanar reformatted image 
of the circumflex artery (arrow). (C) 3D volume-rendered image of the right coronary artery (large arrow), its posterior descending branch 
(upper small arrow) and posterior left ventricular branch (lower small arrow). 

following coronary bypass surgery and analysis of nuclei are exposed to pulsed radiowaves of that 
ventricular wall motion. frequency, they resonate and release energy, which 

allows their location to be determined.
For imaging purposes, the patient lies in a strong 

Magnetic resonance imaging magnetic field which is artificially graded. The 
hydrogen protons of fat and water are imaged and, 

Principles on exposure to pulsed radiowaves, they resonate at 
different frequencies in different parts of the imaging 

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) utilizes the fact zone. Analysis of the emitted frequencies permits the 
that certain nuclei with an intrinsic spin generate construction of tomographic and 3D images of the 
magnetic fields and behave like tiny bar magnets. heart. If data acquisition is gated to a specific part 
Placed in a magnetic field, these nuclei align and of the cardiac cycle, motion artefact is eliminated 
adopt a resonant frequency that is unique to that and excellent image resolution can be obtained. 
nucleus and the strength of the magnetic field. If the Different scanning parameters and patterns of 



SECTION Three
231

Cardiovascular system ﻿
gadolinium enhancement after its intravenous admin- Cardiac angiography
istration allow precise myocardial tissue characteriza-
tion and detection of myocardial ischaemia. Coronary angiography uses relatively small volumes 

of contrast (5-8 ml) injected manually, but other 
Clinical applications angiographic procedures require larger amounts (up 

to 40 ml) introduced by power injection. Digital 
Cardiac MRI is now widely used for the assessment subtraction techniques permit a reduction in contrast 
of cardiac structure and ventricular function. It can volume but at present have only a limited role in 
differentiate between myocardial infarction (Fig. cardiovascular angiographic diagnosis (see below). 
13.52), oedema, fibrosis and fat. MRI is well validated The current generation of angiographic laboratories 
for the assessment of myocardial viability and ischae- uses digital technology to provide high-quality 
mia. It is therefore used in the diagnosis of coronary dynamic images of ventricular wall movement, blood 
artery disease, myocarditis (Fig. 13.53) and cardio- flow and intravascular anatomy.
myopathies. It is also used to guide therapy in patients 
with documented coronary artery disease; particularly Aortic root angiography
in those with chronic coronary occlusions or multives- Injection of contrast into the aortic root demonstrates 
sel disease, the presence of viability or ischaemia, the vascular anatomy in suspected aneurysm or dis-
respectively, provides justification for revascularization. section, and also permits evaluation of aortic valve 
Cardiac MRI does not involve the use of ionizing function (Fig. 13.55). The normal aortic valve prevents 
radiation so it can be used safely for repeated follow- diastolic backflow of contrast, but in aortic regurgita-
up assessments and it is unique among cardiac imaging tion, variable opacification of the left ventricle occurs, 
modalities in being able to assess myocardial function, depending on the severity of the valve lesion.
viability and ischaemia in a single study. MRI provides 
an accurate assessment of valve regurgitant fraction Left ventricular angiography
and it is also highly sensitive for the diagnosis of 
aortic dissection (Fig. 13.54), intracardiac tumours Contrast injection into the left ventricle defines 
and thrombi. ventricular anatomy and wall motion and also permits 

evaluation of mitral valve function. Dilatation of 
the ventricle and contractile dysfunction occurs in 

Cardiac catheterization left ventricular failure. An akinetic segment denotes 
previous myocardial infarction. Exaggerated contractile 

Catheters introduced into an artery or vein may be function with systolic obliteration of the cavity occurs 
directed into the left or right sides of the heart, in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Filling defects within 
respectively. Arterial access is gained percutaneously the ventricular lumen may indicate thrombus or 
from the femoral or radial artery or by surgical neoplasm. The normal mitral valve prevents systolic 
cutdown to the brachial artery. Venous access is backflow of contrast into the left atrium, but in 
usually from the femoral vein. Originally developed mitral regurgitation variable atrial opacification 
for diagnostic purposes, catheter techniques have occurs, depending on the severity of the valve lesion 
now found widespread application in the interven- (Fig. 13.56).
tional management of cardiovascular disease.

Coronary angiography
Coronary angiography is the most reliable technique 
for diagnostic imaging of the coronary arteries and 
assessment of lesion severity. Indications are sum-
marized in Box 13.22. The technique requires selective 
injection of contrast into the left and right coronary 
arteries to opacify the lumen (Fig. 13.57), and multiple 

Box 13.22  Indications for coronary angiography
■	 ST elevation myocardial infarction
■	 High-risk non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes
■	 Severe angina unresponsive to medical treatment
■	 Angina or a positive exercise test following myocardial 

infarction
■	 Cardiac arrhythmias when there is clinical suspicion of 

underlying coronary artery disease
Figure 13.52  Anteroapical myocardial infarction: MRI scan. ■	 Preoperatively in patients requiring valve surgery when 
Delayed gadolinium enhancement (white area, arrows) of the full advanced age (>50 years) or angina suggest a high 
thickness of the anteroapical left ventricular wall indicating probability of coronary artery disease
infarcted, non-viable tissue. 



232 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

A B

C

Figure 13.53  Myocarditis: MRI scan. (A) Still image from a cine loop of a two-chamber view of the left ventricle. Measurements of 
systolic function, chamber size and myocardial mass can be made from the cine loops. (B) Two-chamber view from the same patient with 
imaging for water content (T2 weighted) showing regions of myocardial oedema (arrows). (C) Late enhancement imaging following 
gadolinium infusion allows detection of areas of increased interstitial expansion from scar or oedema (arrows). The subepicardial pattern 
indicates myocarditis. 

views in different projections are necessary for a artery (see MRI perfusion imaging) or from catheter 
complete study. Intraluminal filling defects or occlu- laboratory-based techniques.
sions indicate coronary artery disease, which is nearly 
always caused by atherosclerosis. In stable patients, 
coronary angiography often reveals a stenosis or Pressure wire
stenoses of intermediate severity. Additional informa- Pressure wire is a relatively new catheter laboratory-
tion regarding the functional significance and anatomi- based technology that is increasingly used to assess 
cal severity of the disease is required before treatment functional significance and guide management of 
decisions can be made. This can be obtained either coronary stenoses. The wire has a pressure sensor 
from non-invasive myocardial perfusion imaging that 3 cm from its distal tip. The pressure sensor is cali-
looks for ischaemia in the territory of the affected brated and then equalized to the pressure at the 



SECTION Three
233

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Figure 13.55  Aortic root angiogram: normal study. Contrast 
injection provides an X-ray image of the ascending aorta. The 
coronary arteries arising from the sinuses of Valsalva are clearly 
seen. 

Figure 13.54  Aortic dissection: MRI scan. The upper panel 
(coronal section) reveals an extensive aortic dissection extending 
from the aortic root through the arch and into the descending 
aorta. The lower panel reveals a transverse view through the heart 
and descending aorta. Note the thrombus in the false lumen 
surrounding the true lumen in the descending aorta (arrow). 

Figure 13.56  Left ventricular angiogram showing mitral 
regurgitation. Contrast injection into the left ventricle has resulted 
in prompt opacification of the left atrium owing to backflow across 

guide catheter tip in the left main stem, before being the diseased mitral valve. 
passed down the artery so that the pressure sensor 
is distal to the stenosis to be interrogated. Adenosine 
is administered by intravenous infusion to induce Intravascular ultrasound
maximal hyperaemia in the myocardial capillary bed 
and simulate the physiological state during exercise. An ultrasound transducer mounted at the tip of a 
The fractional flow reserve (FFR) is calculated coronary catheter provides cross-sectional images of 
automatically by computer software from the pressure the artery. The technique permits accurate measure-
measured distal to the stenosis referenced against the ment of the luminal area and provides information 
pressure measured proximal to the stenosis at the about plaque composition and structure that cannot 
guide catheter tip. An FFR <0.75 signifies a stenosis be obtained from angiographic images (Fig. 13.58). 
that is likely to cause myocardial ischaemia and the Intravascular ultrasound has a clinical role in quantify-
stenosis is deemed functionally significant. Clinical ing the severity of intermediate stenoses identified 
studies have shown that pressure wire-guided manage- on coronary angiography, optimizing stent deployment, 
ment is superior to angiographic-driven decision assessing instent restenosis and stent thrombosis, and 
making, predominantly through avoiding procedure- in clarifying the cause of equivocal angiographic 
related myocardial infarction in patients who undergo appearances due to possible thrombus, dissection, 
revascularization. calcium or plaque.



234 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿

A B

Figure 13.57  Coronary angiograms. (A) Left anterior descending disease (arrow). This tight stenosis threatens the coronary supply to the 
anterior wall of the left ventricle. (B) Right coronary artery disease (arrow). Serial stenoses in this dominant right coronary artery threaten 
the supply to the inferior wall of the heart. 

A B

Figure 13.58  Intravascular ultrasound. (A) Non-obstructive, calcified plaque between the 5 and 7 o'clock position in a distal segment of 
the right coronary artery. The ultrasound’s transducer is clearly visible at the intersection of the horizontal and vertical centimetre scales. 
(B) Coronary artery disease. A large semilunar, non-calcified coronary plaque that produced an intermediate severity stenosis on coronary 
angiography is shown extending from the 1 o'clock to the 7 o'clock position, severely reducing the vessel lumen. 

venous route into the right atrium and then advanced 
Pulmonary angiography through the right ventricle into the pulmonary artery. 
Injection of contrast medium into the main pulmonary For measurement of left-sided pressures, the catheter 
artery opacifies the arterial branches throughout both is directed by the arterial route into the ascending 
lung fields. The normal flow distribution is homogene- aorta and advanced retrogradely through the aortic 
ous. Vascular occlusions with regional perfusion defects valve into the left ventricle. Because access to the 
usually indicate pulmonary thromboembolism left atrium is technically difficult, left atrial pressure 
(particularly when intraluminal filling defects are is usually measured indirectly using the pulmonary 
present) but may also occur in advanced emphysema. artery wedge pressure.
The high diagnostic accuracy of CT pulmonary The pulmonary artery wedge pressure is obtained 
angiography means that invasive pulmonary angiog- during right-heart catheterization by advancing the 
raphy is now rarely performed. catheter distally into the pulmonary arterial tree until 

the tip wedges in a small branch. Alternatively, a 
Intracardiac pressure measurement catheter with a preterminal balloon (Swan-Ganz 

catheter) may be used. Inflation of the balloon in the 
Cardiac catheterization for measurement of blood pulmonary artery causes the catheter tip to be carried 
flow and pressure within the heart and great vessels with blood flow into a more distal branch, which 
is widely used both for diagnostic purposes and to becomes occluded by the balloon. Regardless of which 
guide treatment. The fluid-filled catheter is attached method is used, the wedge pressure recorded at the 
to a pressure transducer, which converts the pressure catheter tip is a more or less accurate measure of the 
waves into electrical signals. For measurement of left atrial pressure transmitted retrogradely through 
right-sided pressures, the catheter is directed by the the pulmonary veins and capillaries.



SECTION Three
235

Cardiovascular system ﻿
the pressure gradient increases. This therefore provides 

Haemodynamic evaluation of valvular stenosis a useful index of the severity of stenosis. However, 
In the normal heart, there is no pressure gradient it must be recognized that the pressure gradient is 
across an open valve. Such a gradient usually indicates influenced by the flow through the valve. For example, 
valvular stenosis (Fig. 13.59) and, as stenosis worsens, if cardiac output is very low, the gradient may be 

LV

100 AO
mmHg

A

LV

25 PAW
mmHg

B

Figure 13.59  Valvular stenosis: pressure signals. (A) Aortic stenosis. Simultaneous left ventricular (LV) and aortic (AO) pressure signals. 
In the normal heart, the pressure signals should be essentially similar throughout systole. Here there is a peak systolic gradient of about 
35 mmHg across the aortic valve. Note the prominent ‘a’ wave (arrow), reflecting the major contribution that atrial systole makes to filling 
of the hypertrophied, non-compliant ventricle. Note also the pulsus alternans indicating left ventricular failure. (B) Mitral stenosis: 
simultaneous recordings of the pulmonary artery wedge (PAW) and left ventricular (LV) pressure signals. In the normal heart, the pressure 
signals should be superimposed throughout diastole. Here there is a pressure gradient >10 mmHg, indicating severe mitral stenosis. Note 
that the patient is in atrial fibrillation and the pressure gradient varies inversely with the RR interval, tending to increase as the RR 
interval shortens. 



236 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
small despite the presence of severe stenosis. This Box 13.23  Constriction
applies particularly to the aortic valve because flow 
velocity is normally high. In patients with poor left Typical patient
ventricular function, the 2D appearances of the valve ■	 Middle-aged or elderly patient with a long history of 
on echocardiography and estimates of valve area progressive debilitation
should be considered before concluding that significant Major symptoms
aortic stenosis is not present.

■	 Dyspnoea and weight loss with abdominal discomfort

Haemodynamic evaluation of  Major signs
intracardiac shunts ■	 Fluid retention with raised JVP (prominent ‘x’ and ‘y’ 
Left-to-right intracardiac shunts through atrial or descents), hepatomegaly and peripheral oedema; 
ventricular septal defects introduce ‘arterialized’ blood diastolic filling sound (‘pericardial knock’); paradoxical 
into the right side of the heart. This results in an rise in JVP with inspiration (Kussmaul’s sign)
abrupt increase or step-up in the oxygen saturation Diagnosis
of venous blood at the level of the shunt, which can ■	 High level of clinical suspicion
be detected by right heart catheterization. Thus, by ■	 CT or MRI scan: increased pericardial thickness 
drawing serial blood samples for oxygen saturation (±calcification)
from the pulmonary artery, right ventricle, right atrium ■	 Cardiac catheterization: equalization of diastolic 
and vena cava, the shunt may be localized to the site pressures in the four cardiac chambers
at which the step-up in oxygen saturation occurs. Additional investigations
The magnitude of the step-up is related to the size 
of the shunt, but precise quantification of the shunt ■	 Chest X-ray: often normal but occasionally shows 
requires measurement of pulmonary and systemic pericardial calcification on lateral film
blood flow. The extent to which the pulmonary- Comments
systemic flow ratio exceeds 1 is a measure of the size ■	 Tuberculosis no longer commonest cause in developed 
of the shunt. countries, where most cases are idiopathic

Haemodynamic evaluation of constriction  
and tamponade Box 13.24  Tamponade
In constrictive pericarditis and tamponade (Boxes Typical patient
13.23 and 13.24), diastolic relaxation of the ventricles ■	 Either middle-aged or elderly patient with malignant 
is impeded, preventing adequate filling. Compensatory disease (usually breast or lung) or patients of any age 
increments in atrial pressures occur to help maintain with tuberculosis
ventricular filling, and because these disorders usually Major symptoms
affect both ventricles equally, the filling pressures 
also equilibrate. Thus, simultaneous left- and right- ■	 Dyspnoea and variable circulatory collapse
sided recordings in constrictive pericarditis and Major signs
tamponade show characteristic elevation and equaliza- ■	 Low-output state (hypotension, oliguria, cold periphery), 
tion of the filling pressures (atrial or ventricular tachycardia, paradoxical pulse, raised JVP with rapid  
end-diastolic), with loss of the normal differential ‘x’ descent, paradoxical rise in JVP on inspiration 
(Fig. 13.60). Similar physiology characterizes restric- (Kussmaul’s sign)
tive cardiomyopathy, in which infiltrative disease 
(usually amyloid in the UK) impedes relaxation of Diagnosis

the ventricles. ■	 This is a clinical diagnosis, confirmed by 
echocardiographic demonstration of pericardial effusion

Measurement of cardiac output Additional investigations
Measurement of cardiac output is usually calculated ■	 ECG: low-voltage QRS complexes with alternating 
by thermodilution using a Swan-Ganz catheter with electrical axis
a right atrial portal and a terminal thermistor posi- ■	 Tests for aetiological diagnosis: these might include 
tioned in the pulmonary artery. A known volume of serological tests for rheumatoid and systemic lupus 
cold saline (usually 10 ml) is injected into the right erythematosus and tests for malignant or tuberculous 
atrium and the temperature reduction in the pulmo- disease
nary artery is recorded at the thermistor. The contour Comments
of the cooling curve is dependent on cardiac output, 

■
which is calculated by measuring the area under the 	 Any cause of pericardial effusion may produce 
curve using a bedside computer. tamponade, malignant disease being the commonest 

Cardiac output can also be measured by a variety cause in developed countries. Pericardiocentesis relieves 
of non-invasive methods including oesophageal the tamponade. Pericardial fluid should always be sent 
Doppler probe, pulse waveform analysis, bioimpedance for cytological and bacteriological analysis



SECTION Three
237

Cardiovascular system ﻿

100 LV
mmHg

RV

RV/L V constriction

Figure 13.60  Pericardial constriction: left (LV) and right (RV) ventricular pressure signals. Like tamponade and restrictive 
cardiomyopathy, constriction usually affects both ventricles equally and the diastolic pressures must rise and equilibrate to maintain 
ventricular filling. Thus, in diastole, the pressure signals are superimposed with a typical ‘dip and plateau’ configuration (‘square  
root’ sign). 

and echocardiography. Stroke volume can be calculated Biochemistry laboratory
using 2D echocardiography from the estimated dif-
ference in left ventricular volumes at the end of Cardiac enzymes and other markers of 
systole and diastole. Alternatively, Doppler echocar- myocardial injury
diography can be used to measure stroke volume.

Cardiac output measurement is performed most Following myocardial infarction, enzymes and struc-
commonly in intensive care units to characterize tural proteins released into the circulation by the 
cardiovascular status and monitor responses to treat- necrosing myocytes provide biochemical markers 
ment. It is particularly valuable in the patient in of injury. In the UK, until recently, creatine kinase 
shock whose intravascular volume status cannot be (CK) was the most widely used marker, the MB 
determined by clinical assessment. isoenzyme being the most specific for myocardial 

injury. However, newer serum markers of myocardial 
injury, particularly the highly specific troponins T 

Pathology laboratory support and I, have replaced enzymatic markers. Indeed, 
these form the basis of the updated definition of 

Haematology laboratory myocardial infarction, which is diagnosed in any 
patient with raised circulating troponins who presents 

Anaemia exacerbates angina by adversely affecting with cardiac chest pain or who develops regional 
the myocardial oxygen supply-demand relationship ST elevation on the 12-lead ECG. Implicit in this 
and also exacerbates heart failure by increasing definition is the fact that myocardial infarction may 
the cardiac work necessary to meet the oxygen be diagnosed in patients without ST elevation. In 
demands of metabolizing tissues. Rarely, anaemia is non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (non-STEMI), 
a consequence of, rather than a contributor to, heart the increase in circulating troponin concentration 
disease. In infective endocarditis, a normochromic is a useful measure of risk, troponin concentration 
normocytic anaemia is almost invariable, reflecting correlating directly with rates of recurrent myocardial 
the adverse effects of chronic illness on erythro- infarction and death, and it is widely used to guide 
poiesis. Chronic haemolysis occasionally occurs in decisions about cardiac catheterization and coronary 
patients with mechanical prosthetic heart valves revascularization.
and is caused by traumatic erythrocyte damage. Increased ventricular wall stress (which occurs in 
Anaemia is usually low grade but if severe may require heart failure, left ventricular hypertrophy etc.) causes 
removal of the prosthesis and substitution with a release of natriuretic peptides from the heart (brain 
xenograft. natriuretic peptide, BNP and its precursor, N-terminal 



238 13 Cardiovascular system ﻿
pro BNP), causing dilatation and natriuresis. High the cardiovascular event rate by about 25%. Statins 
levels are associated with worsening symptoms and lower LDL (‘bad’) cholesterol, but if HDL (‘good’) 
prognosis. They can be used to determine whether cholesterol is low, treatment with nicotinic acid or 
breathless patients need further cardiological investiga- fibrates should be added. Treatment of diabetes 
tions or need to be assessed for lung disease. Patients protects against microvascular complications, and in 
with low levels of BNP are unlikely to have heart hyperglycaemic patients with acute myocardial 
failure. infarction, infusion of insulin and glucose is usually 

recommended.
Renal function
Renal function should always be measured in the Bacteriology laboratory
cardiac patient. Renal dysfunction is a major cause 
(and consequence) of hypertension whereas in heart Blood culture
failure, progressive deterioration of renal function is In suspected infective endocarditis (Box 13.25), 
almost inevitable as perfusion of the kidneys becomes treatment must not be delayed beyond the time 
threatened. Renal function may also deteriorate in necessary to obtain three to four blood samples for 
response to treatment with diuretics and angiotensin- culture (Table 13.3). Aerobic, anaerobic and fungal 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, and careful cultures should be performed. Occasionally, bone 
monitoring is essential as these drugs are introduced. marrow cultures are helpful for detection of Candida 
Cardiac drugs that are excreted through the kidneys and Brucella endocarditis. Coxiella and Chlamydia 
(e.g. digoxin) should be used cautiously if renal can never be cultured from the blood and must be 
function is impaired. In the patient with established diagnosed by serological tests. Failure to detect 
renal failure, accelerated coronary artery disease and bacteraemia may be due to pretreatment with antibiot-
heart failure commonly occur, reflecting the combined ics, inadequate sampling (up to six blood samples 
effects of dyslipidaemia, hypertension, arterial 
endothelial dysfunction, anaemia and volume loading 
on the cardiovascular system. Cardiovascular disease 
is the major cause of death in patients with renal Box 13.25  Infective endocarditis
failure. Typical patient

■
Electrolytes 	 Elderly man or woman with mitral or aortic valve 

disease (often not previously recognized)
Patients with hypokalaemia are at risk of lethal cardiac ■	 Younger patients with congenital heart defects (usually 
arrhythmias, while hyperkalaemia may cause bradyar- ventricular septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus)
rhythmias and heart block. Patients presenting with ■	 Patient of any age with prosthetic heart valve or history 
acute coronary syndromes commonly have hypoka- of intravenous drug abuse
laemia, due to the effects of sympathoadrenal activa-
tion on membrane-bound sodium–potassium ATPase, Major symptoms

and this may require correction. For patients taking ■	 Non-specific feverish (‘flu-like’) illness
thiazide or loop diuretics, potassium supplements Major signs
(or potassium-sparing diuretics) are usually necessary ■	 Fever and heart murmur (usually aortic or mitral 
to protect against hypokalaemia unless ACE inhibitors regurgitation)
are also given. The combination of an ACE inhibitor ■	 Splinter haemorrhages and vasculitic rash may occur
and an aldosterone antagonist is used in patients with ■	 Clubbing, Osler’s nodes and Roth’s spots are rare
severe heart failure and can be complicated by 
hyperkalaemia. Serum potassium should always be Diagnosis

measured in patients with hypertension, not only to ■	 Blood culture: usually provides bacteriological diagnosis
provide a baseline before the introduction of diuretic ■	 Echocardiogram: usually reveals valvular regurgitation 
therapy but also as a simple screening test for primary ± vegetation
aldosteronism. Hyponatraemia is common with Additional investigations
chronic diuretic use. ■	 Haematology: leukocytosis; normochromic, normocytic 

anaemia
Glucose and lipids ■	 Inflammatory markers: raised erythrocyte sedimentation 
Blood glucose and lipid profiles (triglycerides, total rate and C-reactive protein
cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and ■	 Urinalysis: haematuria
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol) should Comments
be measured in all patients with suspected vascular 

■	 Formerly a disease of young adults, now seen more 
disease. In high-risk individuals, particularly those commonly in the elderly
with diabetes, and in all patients with established 

■	 Diagnosis should always be considered in patients with 
coronary artery disease, statin therapy is essential fever and a heart murmur
regardless of the baseline lipid profile and reduces 



SECTION Three
239

Cardiovascular system ﻿

Table 13.3  Organisms implicated in endocarditis
First choice of antibiotics 

Organism Typical source of infection (pending sensitivity studies)
Streptococcus viridans Upper respiratory tract Benzylpenicillin, gentamicin
Streptococcus faecalis Bowel and urogenital tract Ampicillin, gentamicin
Anaerobic streptococcus Bowel Ampicillin, gentamicin
Staphylococcus epidermidis Skin Flucloxacillin, gentamicin
Fungi: Candida, histoplasmosis Skin and mucous membranes Amphotericin B*, 5-fluorocytosine*
Coxiella burnetii Complication of Q fever Chloramphenicol*, tetracycline*
Chlamydia psittaci Contact with infected birds Tetracycline*, erythromycin
Acute disease
Staphylococcus aureus Skin Flucloxacillin, gentamicin
Streptococcus pneumoniae Complication of pneumonia Benzylpenicillin, gentamicin
Neisseria gonorrhoeae Venereal Benzylpenicillin, gentamicin

*These drugs are not bactericidal, and valve replacement is nearly always necessary to eradicate infection.

should be taken over 24 hours) or infection with Box 13.26  Jones’s criteria for the diagnosis of rheumatic 
unusual microorganisms. fever
Serology Major criteria
If a recent streptococcal throat infection can be ■	 Carditis
confirmed by demonstrating an elevated serum ■	 Polyarthritis
antistreptolysin O titre, Jones’s criteria may be used ■	 Erythema marginatum
for the diagnosis of rheumatic fever (Box 13.26). ■	 Chorea
The presence of two major criteria, or one major and ■	 Subcutaneous nodules
two minor criteria, indicates a high probability of Minor criteria
rheumatic fever. In suspected viral pericarditis or ■	 Fever
myocarditis, the aetiological diagnosis depends on ■	 Arthralgia
the demonstration of elevated viral antibody titres ■	 Previous rheumatic fever
in acute serum samples, which decline during con- ■	 Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
valescence. Virus may sometimes be cultured from ■	 Prolonged PR interval
throat swabs and stools.

Acknowledgement
The author would like to acknowledge the signifi-
cant contribution of Adam D. Timmis and Andrew 
Archbold, the authors of the equivalent chapter 
in the previous edition of this textbook, on which 
this chapter is based.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Gastrointestinal system 14 
Andrew Rochford and Michael Glynn

The common symptoms of GI and abdominal 
Introduction disease are listed in Box 14.1 and are discussed 

individually below.
The human gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a complex 
system of serially connected organs approximately Dysphagia (and odynophagia)
8 m in length, extending from the mouth to the anus, Dysphagia is the awareness of something sticking in 
which together with its connected secretory glands, the throat or retrosternally during swallowing; 
controls the passage, processing, absorption and odynophagia is the term that describes painful swal-
elimination of food. Symptoms of GI disorders are lowing in the oropharynx or oesophagus and may 
often non-specific, and signs of abnormality few unless occur with or without dysphagia. Dysphagia often 
the disease is advanced. The liver, biliary system and has a significant cause which can be malignant and 
pancreas are embryologically part of the GI tract. almost always needs investigation. An oesophageal 
Symptoms of disease in these organs can also be or upper gastric carcinoma usually presents with 
non-specific but each can give specific clinical features. dysphagia for solids progressing fairly quickly to 
Finally, from the standpoint of systematic history liquids and with accompanying weight loss. A benign 
taking and examination, the kidneys, groin and geni- stricture (or rarely an oesophageal pouch) may follow 
talia are also considered in this chapter. the same pattern but much less rapidly. Neurogenic 

dysphagia may present with greater difficulty in 
swallowing liquids than solids, sometimes associated 

Symptoms of gastrointestinal disease with aspiration or coughing. Odynophagia may 
indicate infection of the oesophageal mucosa, clas-

In normal health there is some awareness of the sically candida oesophagitis associated with HIV 
functioning of the gut, and this can be partly related infection and other immuno-compromised states.
to the body’s needs. For example, thirst and hunger 
are common symptoms; the latter may be associated Heartburn
with epigastric discomfort and a dry mouth may Heartburn is due to acid reflux from the stomach 
suggest the need to drink. Swallowing is normally into the oesophagus. It causes pain in the epigastrium, 
perceived, and there is temperature sensation in the retrosternally and in the neck. It is occasionally difficult 
upper and mid-oesophagus, as well as in the mouth. to distinguish from angina pectoris and may cause 
Vigorous peristaltic contractions in the gut, the atypical chest pain in various sites. It occurs particu-
movement of gas and fluid in the gut, called borbo- larly at night when the patient lies flat in bed or after 
rygmi, and the experience of a sensation of fullness bending or stooping when abdominal pressure is 
in the colon and rectum prior to defaecation or during increased. Heartburn may be exacerbated by dietary 
constipation and the call to stool are all aspects of intake (such as alcohol or very spicy foods) and 
the normal sensation of gut activity. certain medications (such as bisphosphonates).

It is always sensible to remember that, although it 
is often convenient for doctors to classify symptoms Reflux
according to their anatomical site of origin, patients Reflux is a symptom which occurs without heartburn, 
present with single or groups of symptoms that when non-acidic fluid or bile regurgitates into the 
characterize functional or disease processes. Therefore, mouth, causing a bitter taste and a disagreeable 
history taking that follows these likely processes is sensation retrosternally.
more likely to lead to a meaningful diagnosis, 
particularly in the GI tract and abdomen for which Indigestion (dyspepsia)
many symptoms are not easily referable to a clear Dyspepsia is the medical term for indigestion, 
anatomical site. a symptom which may include epigastric pain, 



242 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Box 14.1  Common symptoms of gastrointestinal and pathology particularly in the upper GI tract. It is 
abdominal disease important to recognize the symptom of anorexia as 

distinct from the psychiatric illness anorexia nervosa.
■	 Dysphagia and odynophagia
■	 Heartburn and reflux Constipation
■	 Indigestion The frequency of bowel action varies greatly from 
■	 Flatulence person to person. In developed countries, the statistical 
■	 Vomiting norm is between three bowel actions per day and 
■	 Anorexia three per week. Constipation is a subjective complaint. 
■	 Constipation Patients may say they feel constipated when they 
■	 Diarrhoea sense that they have not adequately emptied the 
■	 Alteration of bowel pattern bowel by defaecation. The term is sometimes used 
■	 Abdominal pain to describe the passage of hard stools, irrespective of 
■	 Abdominal distension stool frequency. In clinical practice, the passage of 
■	 Weight loss formed stool less frequently than three times per 
■	 Haematemesis week is usually taken to indicate an abnormality of 
■	 Rectal bleeding bowel frequency, and if unresponsive to simple treat-
■	 Melaena ment or if there are associated features, then investiga-
■	 Jaundice tion may be needed.
■	 Itching
■	 Urinary symptoms Diarrhoea

Diarrhoea is also subjective, but the regular passage 
of more than three stools per day or the passage of 

heartburn, distension, nausea or ‘an acid feeling’ a large amount of stool (more than 300 g/day) can 
occurring after eating or drinking. The symptom is certainly be called diarrhoea. It commonly results 
subjective and frequent. In many patients there is no from dietary indiscretion or from viral or bacterial 
demonstrable cause but it may be associated with infection. Causes of chronic diarrhoea include inflam-
Helicobacter infection, peptic ulceration, and acid matory bowel disease, in which there may be associ-
reflux. Upper GI malignancy should be excluded in ated passage of blood or mucus per rectum, or 
older patients who present with new onset dyspepsia. malabsorptive states. Steatorrhoea refers to the passage 

of pale, bulky stools containing excess fats that com-
Flatulence monly float in water and are difficult to flush away.
Flatulence describes excessive wind. It is associated 
with belching, abdominal distension and the passage Abdominal pain
of flatus per rectum. It is only infrequently associated Abdominal pain is a common symptom that often 
with organic disease of the GI tract but usually accompanies serious diagnoses but frequently has no 
represents a functional disturbance, some of which definable cause. As with any pain, it is important to 
is due to excessively swallowed air. In some patients characterize its site, intensity, character, areas of 
it is clearly associated with certain foods such as radiation, duration and frequency, together with 
vegetables. aggravating and relieving factors and associated 

features. The particular clinical problem of acute 
Vomiting abdominal pain is discussed on page 138. The par-
Vomiting is a neurogenic response triggered by ticular characteristics of pain from certain frequent 
chemoreceptors in the brainstem or reflexly through and important causes are given in Box 14.2. Pain that 
irritation of the stomach. Vomiting consists of a phase comes in waves is described as colicky and may vary 
of nausea, followed by hypersalivation, pallor, sweating over time. Abdominal pain may also be due to causes 
and hyperventilation. Retching, an involuntary effort that are not specifically in the abdomen such as 
to vomit, then occurs followed by expulsion of gastric metabolic disorders (porphyria or lead poisoning) or 
contents through the mouth and sometimes through depression.
the nose. Most nausea and vomiting of GI origin are 
associated with local discomfort in the abdomen. Abdominal distension
Non-GI disease, such as raised intracranial pressure Abdominal distension has many causes, which include 
or metabolic disturbance, should be suspected if there flatus, fluid (e.g. ascites) and pregnancy. Obesity may 
is painless vomiting not associated with eating. be perceived as abnormal abdominal distension by 

the patient but marked enlargement of the major 
Anorexia organs or the presence of a large mass lesion should 
Anorexia refers to loss of appetite, although some be excluded. Consideration should be given to whether 
patients with GI disease have an appetite for food the distension is symmetrical (as seen with ascites) 
but feel full after just a few mouthfuls (a symptom or asymmetrical (as may be the case with marked 
described as early satiety). It often indicates important organomegaly).



SECTION Three
243

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Box 14.2  Particular characteristics of pain from frequent looks jet-black, tarry and has a characteristic smell. 
and important causes (the regions of the It usually indicates bleeding proximal to the ileo-caecal 
abdomen are shown in Fig. 14.5 – the loin is valve but occasionally may originate from a source 
lateral and posterior to the lumbar area) in the right colon.

■	 Peptic ulcer: epigastric, burning or gnawing, radiates Jaundice
through to back, meal related, wakes the patient, Jaundice (or icterus) is a yellowish pigmentation of 
relieved by antacid the skin and conjunctival membranes due to high 

■	 Gastric cancer: epigastric, severe, partly meal related, levels of bilirubin in the blood. Its presence implies 
not relieved by antacid disease of the liver or the biliary tract although it 

■	 Pancreatic: high epigastric, severe, felt front-to-back, may also be the result of excessive haemolysis. In 
immediately after eating, relieved by sitting forward addition to the characteristic colour of the skin and 

■	 Midgut: periumbilical, colicky, some relation to meals conjunctiva, there may be other associated cutaneous 
■	 Lower gut: periumbilical or suprapubic, colicky, some and systemic features of liver disease, often with dark 

relief from bowel action urine (see below).
■	 Biliary: right upper quadrant, severe, colicky (but over a 

long time period), radiates to right shoulder, Urinary symptoms
accompanied by nausea These are discussed in Chapter 17.

■	 Renal colic: loin-to-groin, colicky, very severe, 
accompanied by nausea

■	 Functional: anywhere in the abdomen, colicky, Nutritional assessment
accompanied by bloating, relieved by bowel action

The simplest nutritional assessment is to ask about 
weight loss and what the patient’s weight was before 

Weight loss the illness. Patients at risk of weight loss and malnutri-
Weight loss may be due to lack of food intake tion may have GI disease preventing eating, reducing 
(anorexia, dysphagia or vomiting), malabsorption of appetite or preventing absorption of nutrients or 
nutrients or a systemic effect of important diseases. non-GI disease causing reduced appetite (especially 
There are diseases that directly cause malabsorption malignancy). Increased energy consumption is also 
such as coeliac disease, inflammatory bowel disease important in some cancer patients and those with 
or pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Weight loss is severe sepsis, thyrotoxicosis or burns.
also commonly associated with conditions such as A full dietary history is best undertaken by a dieti-
cancer (within or outside the GI tract) or chronic tian, but a full medical clerking in a patient who has 
infections such as tuberculosis (within or outside the lost weight needs to include a simple assessment of 
GI tract). the quantity and variety of foods eaten, as well as 

any restrictions on eating (e.g. poor dentition, social 
Haematemesis and financial circumstance) or special diets followed 
Haematemesis is the vomiting of blood and results for medical reasons (e.g. a gluten-free diet in coeliac 
from bleeding in the upper GI tract (above the disease).
duodenojejunal flexure). Blood that lies in gastric A full examination will include most signs of general 
juice for a while turns black and may be vomited and nutrient-specific malnutrition. Some detail of 
looking like ground coffee. Observed reports of vomit- the latter is given in Table 14.1. Body weight and 
ing blood by the patient or bystander may be unreliable patient height are key parts of the general examination. 
and can be confused with haemoptysis (coughing up The two values are used to calculate the body mass 
blood) or blood coming from the oral cavity. index (BMI or Quetelet index). This is defined by 

body weight (in kilograms), divided by height (in 
Rectal bleeding metres) squared. The World Health Organization 
Bleeding from the sigmoid colon, rectum or anal (WHO) classification of this index is given in Table 
canal typically causes bright red blood loss that is 14.2. In the UK, the range 20-25 is often regarded 
separate from the stool or just noticeable on the toilet as desirable, but the lower level of 18.5 is more 
paper; haemorrhoids are the commonest cause. If applicable internationally. Patients with a BMI >30 
darker red and mixed with the stool, this usually should undergo weight loss. In malnourished children, 
indicates a source above the rectum, of which car- retardation of height lags behind that of weight 
cinoma is the most important cause. Large-volume and the relation between weight and height should 
rectal bleeding (haematochezia) in an ill patient may always be compared with age using appropriate charts. 
be from an upper GI source. If height cannot be measured, there are nomograms 

which relate the length of the forearm (ulna) or knee 
Melaena height (knee to heel) to the true height. In addition, 
Melaena describes altered blood that has passed the state of nourishment can be assessed by the 
through a significant length of the small bowel and more specialized measurements of mid-upper arm 



244 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Table 14.1  Principal symptoms and signs due to vitamin and mineral deficiencies
Nutrients Deficiency syndrome Principal symptoms/signs
Vitamin A, retinol Protein-energy Night blindness, Bitot spots, keratomalacia
(carotenoids) malnutrition
Vitamin B1, thiamine Wernicke/Korsakoff, Nystagmus, sixth cranial nerve palsy, ataxia (Wernicke’s 

beri-beri encephalopathy)
Symmetrical peripheral neuropathy (dry beri-beri), fulminant 
cardiac failure, lactic acidosis (Shoshin beri-beri), high output 
cardiac failure (wet beri-beri)

Vitamin B2, riboflavin Ariboflavinosis Angular stomatitis, glossitis, magenta tongue
Vitamin B3, niacin, Pellagra Dermatitis of sun-exposed areas (including ‘Casal’s Necklace’), 
nicotinic acid dementia, poor appetite, difficulty sleeping, diarrhoea
Vitamin B6, pyridoxine Deficiency associated Poor appetite, lassitude, oxaluria, seborrhea, neuropathy

with isoniazid use
Pantothenic acid Nausea, abdominal pain, paraesthesiae, burning feet
Biotin Dermatitis, depression, lassitude, muscle pains, 

electrocardiogram abnormalities, blepharitis
Folic acid Deficiency associated Macrocytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia and megaloblastic bone 

with methotrexate use marrow
Vitamin B12 Pernicious anaemia Subacute combined degeneration of the spine, macrocytic 

anaemia
Vitamin C, ascorbic acid Scurvy Poor wound healing, fatigue, limb pain, shortness of breath, 

difficulty sleeping, gingivitis, perifollicular purpura, hyperkeratosis
Vitamin D, ergo-/ Rickets/osteomalacia Bone pain, proximal myopathy, waddling gait, growth retardation
cholecalciferol
Vitamin E, tocopherol Haemolysis, posterior column signs, ataxia, muscle wasting, 

retinitis pigmentosa-like changes, night blindness
Vitamin K, phylloquinone Chronic liver disease Bruising, purpura, coagulopathy
and other menaquinones
Trace elements
Iron Koilonychia, smooth tongue, anaemia, oesophageal web, impaired 

cognitive development
Zinc Acrodermatitis Peristomal/perinasal/perineal erythema, thin hair, diarrhoea, 

enteropathica apathy, anorexia, growth failure, hypoglycaemia
Copper Microcytic hypochromic anaemia, neutropenia, scurvy-like bone 

lesions, osteoporosis
Chromium Peripheral neuropathy, hyperglycaemia
Selenium Cardiomyopathy
Iodine Goitre

Table 14.2  World Health Organization classification of body circumference (MUAC), skin-fold thickness, waist 
weight circumference and waist/hip ratio.

All UK hospital inpatients are now assessed for 
Category BMI/Quetelet index their risk of malnutrition. The most common assess-
Underweight <18.5 ment method used by healthcare staff is the Malnutri-
Healthy weight 18.5-24.9 tion Universal Screening Tool (MUST). This involves 
Overweight 25-29.9 calculating the patient’s BMI and then adding on a 

score for the percentage of unexpected weight loss 
Moderately obese 30-34.9 and a score for the degree of acute illness. The final 
Severely obese 35-39.9 score is used to trigger a full dietary assessment and 
Morbidly obese >40 initiation of treatment in those who need it. Patients 

should be screened weekly whilst in hospital and at 
every outpatient attendance.



SECTION Three
245

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Physical examination of the GI tract  being more important than the overall redness). 
Inflammatory bowel disease may give rise to clubbing 

and abdomen of the hands, arthritis, uveitis and skin changes includ-
ing erythema nodosum (tender raised red lumps on 

General signs the extensor surface of the limbs) and the much rarer 
pyoderma gangrenosum. Anaemia accompanies many 

Systemic features of GI disease may be evident on GI diseases, as does oedema, and lymphadenopathy 
general examination. Peripheral signs of chronic liver can be secondary to GI malignancy.
disease are listed in Box 14.3. Of these, the most It is helpful when examining the patient, recording 
common and useful are spider naevi (Fig. 14.1) (the in notes or communicating information to colleagues 
presence of up to five can be normal) and palmar to remember the surface anatomy of the structures 
erythema (Fig. 14.2) (the blotchy appearance often related to the GI tract and abdomen (Figs 14.3 and 

14.4) and to think of the abdomen as divided into 
regions (Fig. 14.5). The two lateral vertical planes 

Box 14.3  Peripheral stigmata (signs) of chronic  pass from the femoral artery below to cross the costal 
liver disease margin close to the tip of the ninth costal cartilage. 

The two horizontal planes, the subcostal and interiliac, 
Skin, nails and hands pass across the abdomen to connect the lowest points 
■	 Spider naevi – small telangiectatic superficial blood on the costal margin and the tubercles of the iliac 

vessels with a central feeding vessel crests, respectively.
■	 Clubbing of the hands Remember that the area of each region will depend 
■	 Leuconychia – expansion of the paler half-moon at the on the width of the subcostal angle and the proximity 

base of the nail of costal margin to iliac crest, in addition to other 
■	 Palmar erythema – seen on the thenar and hypothenar features of bodily habitus which vary greatly from 

eminence – often with blotchy appearance one patient to the next.
■	 Bruising
■	 Dupuytren’s contracture – can occur in the absence of Inspection

liver disease
■	 Scratch marks – particularly in cholestatic liver disease The patient should be lying supine with arms loosely 

at the sides, the head and neck supported by up to 
Endocrine – due to excess oestrogens two pillows, sufficient for comfort (Fig. 14.6). A 
■	 Gynaecomastia sagging mattress makes examination difficult, par-
■	 Testicular atrophy ticularly palpation. Make sure there is a good light, 
■	 Loss of axillary and pubic hair that the room is warm and that the hands are warm. 
Other A shivering patient cannot relax and vital signs, 
■	 Parotid swelling – particularly in alcohol-related liver especially on palpation, may be missed.

disease Stand on the patient’s right side, introduce yourself 
■	 Hepatic foetor – characteristic sweet-smelling breath to the patient and with his consent expose the 
■	 Hepatic flap – a sign of encephalopathy and advanced abdomen by turning down all the bed clothes except 

disease the upper sheet. The clothing should then be drawn 
up to just above the xiphisternum and the sheet 

Figure 14.1  A typical spider naevus, with a central arteriole and Figure 14.2  Palmar erythema in chronic liver disease (sparing 
fine radiating vessels. the centre of the palms). 



246 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

First rib

Lungs at full
expiration

Right margin Left margin of
of heart heart

Nipple

Costal margin

Liver
Lungs at full
inspiration

Pylorus Stomach

Tenth rib
Transverse colon

Small bowel

Symphysis pubis

Figure 14.3  Anterior view of the external relationships of the abdominal and thoracic organs. 

folded down to the level of the symphysis pubis. 
Traditional teaching was to expose the patient ‘from Shape
nipples to knees’, but in the modern era when patient Is the abdomen of normal contour and fullness, or 
dignity is of paramount importance, this approach is distended? Is it scaphoid (sunken)?
not acceptable. However, inspection of the groins ■	 Generalized fullness or distension may be due 
and genitalia must not be neglected and needs to be to fat, fluid, flatus, faeces or fetus.
carried out with discretion, with full explanation as ■	 Localized distension may be symmetrical and 
to the reasons, and leaving these areas exposed for centred around the umbilicus as in the case of 
the minimum time. It is not unusual for a patient to small bowel obstruction, or asymmetrical as in 
present with intestinal obstruction due to a strangu- gross enlargement of the spleen, liver or ovary.
lated femoral or inguinal hernia where the diagnosis ■	 Make a mental note of the site of any such 
has been missed initially due to lack of proper swelling or distension; think of the anatomical 
inspection of the groins in an effort to save embar- structures in that region and note if there is any 
rassment. Inspection is an important and neglected movement of the swelling, either with, or 
part of abdominal examination. Initially, it is well independent of, respiration.
worthwhile spending 30 seconds observing the ■	 Remember that chronic urinary retention may 
abdomen from different positions to note the following cause palpable enlargement in the lower 
features: abdomen.



SECTION Three
247

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Humerus

Scapula

Lung

Lungs at full
expiration

Spleen

Lungs at full
Pancreas inspiration

Left kidney
Right kidney

Fifth lumbar
Pelvis vertebra

Sacrum

Femur

Figure 14.4  Posterior view of the external relationships of the abdominal and thoracic organs. The liver is not shown. 

A scaphoid abdomen is seen in advanced stages of In generalized peritonitis, this movement is absent 
starvation and malignant disease. or markedly diminished (the ‘still, silent abdomen’). 

To aid the recognition of intra-abdominal movements, 
The umbilicus shine a light across the patient’s abdomen. Even small 
Normally the umbilicus is slightly retracted and movements of the intestine may then be detected 
inverted. If it is everted, then an umbilical hernia by alterations in the pattern of shadows cast over the 
may be present and this can be confirmed by feeling abdomen.
an expansile impulse on palpation of the swelling Visible pulsation of the abdominal aorta may be 
when the patient coughs. The hernial sac may contain noticed in the epigastrium and is a frequent finding 
omentum, bowel or fluid. A common finding in the in nervous, thin patients. It must be distinguished 
umbilicus of elderly obese people is a concentration from an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta, where 
of inspissated desquamated epithelium and other pulsation is more obvious and a widened aorta is felt 
debris (omphalolith). on palpation.

Visible peristalsis of the stomach or small intestine 
Movements of the abdominal wall may be observed in three situations:
Normally there is a gentle rise in the abdominal wall 1	 Obstruction at the pylorus. Visible peristalsis 
during inspiration and a fall during expiration; the may occur where there is obstruction at the 
movement should be free and equal on both sides. pylorus produced either by fibrosis following 



248 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Right subcostal Upper
(Kocher's) midline

2 Right Lower
paramedian midline

1 3
Appendectomy Left

4 5 6 inguinal
Suprapubic

(Pfannenstiel)
7 8 9

Figure 14.7  Some commonly used abdominal incisions. The 
midline and oblique incisions avoid damage to the innervation of 
the abdominal musculature and the later development of 
incisional hernia. 

Figure 14.5  Regions of the abdomen. 1 and 3, right and left 
hypochondrium; 2, epigastrium; 4 and 6, right and left lumbar;  
5, umbilical; 7 and 9, right and left iliac; 8, hypogastrium or elicited more easily after the infant has been 
suprapubic. given a feed. Standing behind the child’s mother 

with the child held on her lap may allow the 
child’s abdominal musculature to relax 
sufficiently to feel the walnut-sized swelling.

2	 Obstruction in the distal small bowel.  
Peristalsis may be seen where there is  
intestinal obstruction in the distal small  
bowel or coexisting large and small bowel 
hold-up produced by distal colonic obstruction, 
with an incompetent ileo-caecal valve allowing 
reflux of gas and liquid faeces into the ileum. 
Not only is the abdomen distended and 
tympanitic (hyper-resonant) but the distended 
coils of small bowel may be visible in a thin 

Figure 14.6  Position of the patient and exposure for abdominal patient and tend to stand out in the centre of 
examination. Note that the genitalia should be exposed only when 
necessary. the abdomen in a ‘ladder pattern’.

3	 As a normal finding in very thin, elderly patients 
with lax abdominal muscles or large, 

chronic duodenal ulceration or, less commonly, wide-necked incisional herniae seen through an 
by carcinoma of the stomach in the pyloric abdominal scar.
antrum. In pyloric obstruction, a diffuse swelling 
may be seen in the left upper abdomen but, Skin and surface of the abdomen
where obstruction is longstanding with severe In marked abdominal distension, the skin is smooth 
gastric distension, this swelling may occupy the and shiny. Striae atrophica or gravidarum are white 
left mid and lower quadrants. Such a stomach or pink wrinkled linear marks on the abdominal skin. 
may contain a large amount of fluid and, on They are produced by gross stretching of the skin 
shaking the abdomen, a splashing noise is with rupture of the elastic fibres and indicate a recent 
usually heard (‘succussion splash’). This splash is change in size of the abdomen, such as is found in 
frequently heard in healthy patients for up to 3 pregnancy, ascites, wasting diseases and severe dieting. 
hours after a meal, so enquire when the patient Wide purple striae are characteristic of Cushing’s 
last ate or drank. In congenital pyloric stenosis syndrome and excessive steroid treatment.
of infancy, not only may visible peristalsis be Note any scars present, their site, whether they are 
apparent but also the grossly hypertrophied old (white) or recent (red or pink), linear or stretched 
circular muscle of the antrum and pylorus may (and therefore likely to be weak and contain an 
be felt as a ‘tumour’ to the right of the midline incisional hernia). Common examples are given in 
in the epigastrium. Both these signs may be Fig. 14.7.



SECTION Three
249

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Thin veins
over costal

margin

Dilated veins in
Caput obstruction of

medusae inferior vena
cava

Figure 14.8  Prominent veins of the abdominal wall. 
Figure 14.9  Correct method of palpation. The hand is held flat 
and relaxed and ‘moulded’ to the abdominal wall. 

Look for prominent superficial veins, which may 
be apparent in three situations (Fig. 14.8): thin veins 
over the costal margin, usually of no significance; 
occlusion of the inferior vena cava; and venous 
anastomoses in portal hypertension. Inferior vena 
caval obstruction not only causes oedema of the 
limbs, buttocks and groins but, in time, distended 
veins on the abdominal wall and chest wall appear. 
These represent dilated anastomotic channels between 
the superficial epigastric and circumflex iliac veins 
below and the lateral thoracic veins above, conveying 
the diverted blood from the long saphenous vein to 
the axillary vein; the direction of flow is therefore 
upwards. If the veins are prominent enough, try to Figure 14.10  Incorrect method of palpation. The hand is held 
detect the direction in which the blood is flowing rigid and mostly not in contact with the abdominal wall. 
by occluding a vein, emptying it by massage and then 
looking for the direction of refill. Distended veins 
around the umbilicus (caput medusae) are uncommon 
but signify portal hypertension, other signs of which Palpation
may include splenomegaly, ascites and other cutaneous Palpation forms the most important part of the 
manifestations of chronic liver disease. These distended abdominal examination. Ask the patient to relax as 
veins represent the opening up of anastomoses much as possible, to breathe quietly, and assure him 
between portal and systemic veins and occur in other that you will be as gentle as possible. Enquire about 
sites, such as oesophageal and rectal varices. the site of any pain and examine this region last. 

Pigmentation of the abdominal wall may be seen These points, together with unhurried palpation with 
in the midline below the umbilicus, where it forms a warm hand, will give the patient confidence and 
the linea nigra and is a sign of pregnancy. Erythema allow the maximum amount of information to be 
ab igne is a brown mottled pigmentation produced obtained.
by constant application of heat, usually a hot water When palpating, the wrist and forearm should be 
bottle or heat pad, on the skin of the abdominal wall. in the same horizontal plane where possible, even if 
It is a sign that the patient is experiencing severe this means bending down or kneeling by the patient’s 
persistent pain such as from chronic pancreatitis. side. The best palpation technique involves moulding 

Finally, uncover and inspect both groins and the the relaxed right hand to the abdominal wall, not to 
external genitalia. In male patients inspect and hold it rigid (Fig. 14.9). The best movement is gentle 
examine the penis and scrotum for any swellings and but with firm pressure, with the fingers held almost 
to ensure that both testes are in their normal position. straight but with slight flexion at the metacar-
Then bring the sheet back up to the level of the pophalangeal joints and avoiding sudden poking with 
symphysis pubis. the fingertips (Fig. 14.10).



250 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Figure 14.12  Palpation of the left kidney. 

Figure 14.11  Method of deep palpation in an obese, muscular or 
poorly relaxed patient. 

All the organs in the upper abdomen (liver, spleen, 
kidneys, stomach, pancreas, gallbladder) move down-

Palpation of intra-abdominal structures is an ward with inspiration (with the spleen moving more 
imperfect process in which the great sensitivity of downwards and medially). Thus, asking the patient 
the sense of touch and pressure is heavily masked by to take a deep breath while examining makes detection 
the abdominal wall tissue. It is unusual for structures of these organs easier. When the patient breathes in, 
to be very easily palpable and so it is necessary to the examining hand should be still so that the organ 
concentrate fully on the task and to try to visualize in question ‘comes on to the examining hand’ or 
the normal anatomical structures and what might be ‘slips by underneath it’.
palpable beneath the examining hand. It may be 
necessary to repeat the palpation more slowly and Left kidney
deeply. Putting the left hand on top of the right The right hand is placed anteriorly in the left lumbar 
allows increased pressure to be exerted (Fig. 14.11), region while the left hand is placed posteriorly in 
such as with an obese or very muscular patient. the left loin (Fig. 14.12). Ask the patient to take a 

A small proportion of patients find it impossible deep breath in, press the left hand forward and lift 
to relax their abdominal muscles when being exam- the right hand upward and inward. The left kidney 
ined. In such cases, it may help to ask them to breathe is not usually palpable unless either low in position 
deeply, to bend their knees up or to distract their or enlarged. Its lower pole, when palpable, is felt as 
attention in other ways. No matter how experienced a rounded firm swelling between both right and left 
the examiner, little will be gained from palpation of hands (i.e. bimanually palpable) and it can be pushed 
a poorly relaxed abdomen. from one hand to the other, in an action which is 

It is helpful to have a logical sequence to follow called ‘ballotting’.
and, if this is done as a matter of routine, then no 
important point will be omitted. Always consider the Spleen
underlying anatomy when examining the abdomen. Like the left kidney, the spleen is not normally 
The following scheme is suggested, which may need palpable. It has to be enlarged to two or three times 
to be varied according to the site of any pain: its usual size before it becomes palpable and then is 
■	 Start in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen, felt beneath the left subcostal margin. Enlargement 

palpating lightly, and repeat for each quadrant. takes place in a superior and posterior direction before 
■	 Repeat using slightly deeper palpation it becomes palpable subcostally. Once the spleen has 

examining each of the nine areas of the become palpable, the direction of further enlargement 
abdomen. is downwards and towards the right iliac fossa (Fig. 

■	 Feel for the left kidney. 14.13). Place the flat of the left hand over the lower-
■	 Feel for the spleen. most rib cage posterolaterally, thus restricting the 
■	 Feel for the right kidney. expansion of the left lower ribs on inspiration and 
■	 Feel for the liver. concentrating more of the inspiratory movement into 
■	 Feel for the aorta and para-aortic glands and moving the spleen downwards. The right hand is 

common femoral vessels. placed beneath the costal margin well out to the left. 
■	 Feel for the urinary bladder. Press in deeply with the fingers of the right hand 
■	 Palpate both groins. beneath the costal margin, at the same time exerting 
■	 Examine the external genitalia. considerable pressure medially and downwards with 
■	 If a swelling is palpable, spend time eliciting its the left hand (Fig. 14.14), and then ask the patient 

features. to breathe in deeply. Repeat this manoeuvre with 



SECTION Three
251

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Costal margin
Tip enlargement
(1–2cm)
Moderate Figure 14.16  Palpation of the right kidney. 
enlargement
(3–7cm)
Marked
enlargement ribs, and repeat the examination as above. Alternatively 
(7+cm) the spleen may be very large and the lower edge may 

Figure 14.13  The direction of enlargement of the spleen.  be much lower than at first suspected. It may help 
The spleen has a characteristic notched shape and the organ to ask the patient to place the left hand on your right 
moves downwards during full inspiration. shoulder while palpating for the spleen.

In minor degrees of enlargement, the spleen will 
be felt as a firm swelling with smooth, rounded 
borders. Where considerable splenomegaly is present, 
its typical characteristics include a firm swelling 
appearing beneath the left subcostal margin in the 
left upper quadrant of the abdomen, which is dull 
to percussion, moves downwards on inspiration, is 
not bimanually palpable, whose upper border cannot 
be felt (i.e. one cannot ‘get above it’) and in which 
a notch can often, though not invariably, be felt in 
the lower medial border. The last three features 
distinguish the enlarged spleen from an enlarged 
kidney; in addition, there is usually a band of colonic 
resonance anterior to an enlarged kidney.

Figure 14.14  Palpation of the spleen. Start well out to the left. 
Right kidney
Feel for the right kidney in much the same way as 
for the left. Place the right hand horizontally in the 
right lumbar region anteriorly with the left hand 
placed posteriorly in the right loin. Push forwards 
with the left hand, lift the right hand inward and 
upward (Fig. 14.16) and ask the patient to take a 
deep breath in. The lower pole of the right kidney, 
unlike the left, is commonly palpable in thin patients 
and is felt as a smooth, rounded swelling which 
descends on inspiration and is bimanually palpable 
and may be ‘ballotted’ (bounced back and forth 
between the two examining hands).

Liver
Figure 14.15  Palpation of the spleen more medially than in  Place both hands side by side flat on the abdomen 
Fig. 14.14. in the right subcostal region lateral to the rectus 

with the fingers pointing towards the ribs. If resist-
the right hand being moved more medially beneath ance is encountered, move the hands further down 
the costal margin on each occasion (Fig. 14.15). If until this resistance disappears. Exert gentle pressure 
enlargement of the spleen is suspected from the and ask the patient to breathe in deeply. Concen-
history and it is still not palpable, turn the patient trate on whether the edge of the liver can be felt 
half on to the right side, ask him to relax back on to moving downwards and under the examining hand 
your left hand, which is now supporting the lower (Fig. 14.17).



252 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Costal margin

Liver edge

Figure 14.17  Palpation of the liver: preferred method. Portion of
enlarged gallbladder

Figure 14.19  Palpation of an enlarged gallbladder, showing how 
it merges with the inferior border of the liver so that only the 
fundus of the gallbladder and part of its body can be palpated. 

tricuspid regurgitation, the liver may be felt to pulsate. 
Occasionally a congenital variant of the right lobe 
projects down lateral to the gallbladder as a tongue-
shaped process called Riedel’s lobe. Though uncom-
mon, it is important to be aware of this because it 
may be mistaken either for the gallbladder itself or 
for the right kidney.

Gallbladder
The gallbladder is palpated in the same way as the 

Figure 14.18  Palpation of the liver: alternative method. liver. The normal gallbladder cannot be felt. When 
it is distended, however, it forms an important sign 
and may be palpated as a firm, smooth, or globular 

Repeat this manoeuvre working from lateral to swelling with distinct borders, just lateral to the edge 
medial regions to trace the liver edge as it passes of the rectus abdominis near the tip of the ninth 
upwards to cross from right hypochondrium to costal cartilage. It moves with respiration. Its upper 
epigastrium. Another commonly employed method border merges with the lower border of the right 
of feeling for an enlarged liver is to place the right lobe of the liver or disappears beneath the costal 
hand below and parallel to the right subcostal margin. margin and therefore can never be felt (Fig. 14.19). 
The liver edge will then be felt against the radial When the liver is enlarged or the gallbladder grossly 
border of the index finger (Fig. 14.18). The liver is distended, the latter may be felt not in the hypo-
often palpable in normal patients without being chondrium but in the right lumbar or even as low 
enlarged. The lower edge of the liver can be clarified down as the right iliac region.
by percussion (see below), as can the upper border The ease of definition of the rounded borders of 
in order to determine overall size: a palpable liver the gallbladder, its comparative mobility on respiration, 
edge can be due to enlargement or displacement the fact that it is not normally bimanually palpable 
downwards by lung pathology. Hepatomegaly con- and that it seems to lie just beneath the abdominal 
ventionally is measured in centimetres palpable below wall helps to identify such a swelling as the gallbladder 
the right costal margin, which should be determined rather than a palpable right kidney. A painless gallblad-
with a ruler if possible. Alternatively, displacement der can usually be palpated in the following clinical 
measured in fingerbreadths is an acceptable way of situations:
describing hepatomegaly. ■	 In a jaundiced patient with carcinoma of the 

Try to discern the character of the liver surface head of the pancreas or other malignant causes 
(i.e. whether it is soft, smooth and tender as in heart of obstruction of the common bile duct (below 
failure, very firm and regular as in obstructive jaundice the entry of the cystic duct), the ducts above 
and cirrhosis, or hard, irregular, painless and sometimes the obstruction become dilated, as does the 
nodular as in advanced secondary carcinoma). In gallbladder (see Courvoisier’s law, below).



SECTION Three
253

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Bladder
enlargement

Figure 14.20  A mucocele of the gallbladder that is distended, 
pale and thin walled. 

Figure 14.21  Physical signs in retention of urine: a smooth, firm 
and regular swelling arising out of the pelvis which one cannot 

■	 In mucocele of the gallbladder, a gallstone ‘get below’ and which is dull to percussion. 
becomes impacted in the neck of a collapsed, 
empty, uninfected gallbladder and mucus 
continues to be secreted into its lumen (Fig. The urinary bladder
14.20). Eventually, the uninfected gallbladder is 
so distended that it becomes palpable. In this Normally the urinary bladder is not palpable. When 
case, the bile ducts are normal and the patient it is full and the patient cannot empty it (retention 
is not jaundiced. of urine), a smooth, firm, regular oval-shaped swelling 

■	 In carcinoma of the gallbladder, the gallbladder will be palpated in the suprapubic region and its 
may be felt as a stony, hard, irregular swelling, dome (upper border) may reach as far as the umbili-
unlike the firm, regular swelling in the two cus. The lateral and upper borders can be readily 
above-mentioned conditions. identified, but it is not possible to feel its lower border 

(i.e. the swelling is ‘arising out of the pelvis’). The 
Murphy’s sign fact that this swelling is symmetrically placed in 
In acute inflammation of the gallbladder (acute the suprapubic region beneath the umbilicus, that it 
cholecystitis), severe pain is present. Often an exqui- is dull to percussion and that pressure on it gives 
sitely tender but indefinite mass can be palpated; this the patient a desire to micturate, together with the 
represents the underlying acutely inflamed gallbladder signs above, confirm such a swelling as the bladder 
walled off by greater omentum. Ask the patient to (Fig. 14.21).
breathe in deeply and palpate for the gallbladder in In women, however, a mass that is thought to be 
the normal way; at the height of inspiration, the a palpable bladder has to be differentiated from a 
breathing stops with a gasp as the mass is felt. This gravid uterus (firmer, mobile side to side), a fibroid 
represents Murphy’s sign. The sign is not found in uterus (may be bosselated and firmer) and an ovarian 
chronic cholecystitis or uncomplicated cases of cyst (usually eccentrically placed to left or right side).
gallstones.

The aorta and common femoral vessels
Courvoisier’s law In most adults, the aorta is not readily felt, but with 
Courvoisier’s law states that in the presence of practice it can usually be detected by deep palpation 
jaundice, a palpable gallbladder makes gallstone a little above and to the left of the umbilicus. In thin 
obstruction of the common bile duct an unlikely patients, particularly women with a marked lumbar 
cause (because it is likely that the patient will have lordosis, the aorta is more easily palpable. Palpation 
had gallbladder stones for some time and these will of the aorta is one of the few occasions in the abdomen 
have rendered the wall of the gallbladder relatively when the fingertips are used as a means of palpation. 
fibrotic and therefore non-distensible). However, the Press the extended fingers of both hands, held side 
converse is not true, because the gallbladder is not by side, deeply into the abdominal wall in the position 
palpable in many patients who do turn out to have shown in Fig. 14.22; identify the left wall of the aorta 
malignant bile duct obstruction. and note its pulsation. Remove both hands and repeat 



254 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Causes of diagnostic difficulty on palpation
In many patients, especially those with a thin or lax 
abdominal wall, faeces in the colon may simulate an 
abdominal mass. The sigmoid colon is frequently 
palpable, particularly when loaded with hard faeces. 
It is felt as a firm, tubular structure about 12 cm in 
length, situated low down in the left iliac fossa, parallel 
to the inguinal ligament. The caecum is often palpable 
in the right iliac fossa as a soft, rounded swelling 
with indistinct borders. The transverse colon is 
sometimes palpable in the epigastrium. It feels 
somewhat like the pelvic colon but rather larger and 
softer, with distinct upper and lower borders and a 

Figure 14.22  Palpation of the abdominal aorta. convex anterior surface. A faecal ‘mass’ will usually 
have disappeared or moved on repeat examination 
and may retain an indentation with pressure (not the 
case with a colonic malignancy).

In the epigastrium, the muscular bellies of rectus 
abdominis lying between its tendinous intersections 
can mimic an underlying mass and give rise to 
confusion. This can usually be resolved by asking 
the patient to tense the abdominal wall (by lifting 
the head off the pillow), when the ‘mass’ may be felt 
to contract.

What to do when an abdominal mass  
is palpable
When a mass in the abdomen is palpable, first make 

Figure 14.23  Palpation of the femoral vessels. sure that it is not a normal structure, as described 
above. Consider whether it could be due to enlarge-
ment of the liver, spleen, right or left kidney, gallblad-

the manoeuvre a few centimetres to the right. In this der, urinary bladder, aorta or para-aortic nodes. 
way the pulsation and width of the aorta can be The aim of examination of a mass is to decide 
estimated. It is difficult to detect small aortic aneu- the organ of origin and the pathological nature. 
rysms; where a large one is present, its presence and In doing this, it is helpful to bear in the mind the 
width may be assessed by placing the extended following points:
fingertips on either side of it with the palms flat on 
the abdominal wall and the fingers pointing towards Site
each other. When the fingertips are either side of an Feeling the swelling while the patient lifts his head 
aneurysm, it should be clear that they are being and shoulders off the pillow to tense the anterior 
separated by each pulsation and not just moved up abdominal wall will differentiate between a mass in 
and down (this latter manoeuvre can involve very the abdominal wall and within the abdominal cavity.
deep palpation and the patient should be warned). Note the region occupied by the swelling. Think 

The common femoral vessels are found just below of the organs that normally lie in or near this region 
the inguinal ligament at the mid-point between the and consider whether the swelling could arise from 
anterior superior iliac spine and symphysis pubis. one of these organs. For instance, a swelling in the 
Place the pads of the right index, middle and ring right upper quadrant most probably arises from the 
fingers over this site in the right groin and palpate liver, right kidney, hepatic flexure of colon or 
the wall of the vessel. Note the strength and character gallbladder.
of its pulsation and then compare it with the opposite If the swelling is in the upper abdomen, try to 
femoral pulse (Fig. 14.23). determine if it is possible to ‘get above it’; that is, to 

Lymph nodes lying along the aorta (para-aortic feel the upper border of the swelling as it disappears 
nodes) are palpable only when considerably enlarged. above the costal margin, and similarly, if it is in the 
They are felt as rounded, firm, often confluent fixed lower abdomen, whether one can ‘get below it’. If 
masses in the umbilical region and epigastrium along one cannot ‘get above’ an upper abdominal swelling, 
the left border of the aorta. Pulsations of the aorta a hepatic, splenic, renal or gastric origin should be 
are transmitted through the nodes which separates suspected. If one cannot ‘get below’ a lower abdominal 
them from the expansile pulsations palpated in mass, the swelling probably arises in the bladder, 
aneurysmal dilatation. uterus, ovary or, occasionally, upper rectum.



SECTION Three
255

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
Size and shape of the abdomen is resonant (tympanic) except over 
As a general rule, gross enlargement of the liver, the liver, where the note is dull. A normal spleen is 
spleen, uterus, bladder or ovary presents no undue not large enough to render the percussion note dull. 
difficulty in diagnosis. On the other hand, swellings A resonant percussion note over suspected enlarge-
arising from the stomach, small or large bowel, ret- ment of liver or spleen weighs against there being 
roperitoneal structures such as the pancreas, or the true enlargement.
peritoneum (see section on mobility, below) may be In obese patients, tympanic areas of the abdomen 
difficult to diagnose. The larger a swelling arising may not give a truly resonant percussion note and 
from one of these structures, the more it tends to palpation of organs such as a large liver is more 
distort the outline of the organ of origin (e.g. a large difficult. If hepatomegaly is suspected, rhythmic 
renal mass can feel as if it is arising from intraperi- percussion just above the suspected lower border of 
toneal organs). the liver, as the patient breathes in and out deeply, 

can elicit a note cyclically changing between dull to 
Surface, edge and consistency hollow, and eliciting this change may be more certain 
The pathological nature of a mass is suggested by a than the character of the fixed and unchanging note.
number of features. A swelling that is hard, irregular 
in outline and nodular is likely to be malignant, while Defining the boundaries of abdominal organs 
a regular, round, smooth, tense swelling is likely to and masses
be cystic. A solid, ill-defined and tender mass suggests Liver
an inflammatory lesion such as may be seen in ileocae-
cal Crohn’s disease. The upper and lower borders of the right lobe of the 

liver can be mapped out accurately by percussion. 
Mobility and attachments Start anteriorly, at the fourth intercostal space, where 
Swellings arising in the liver, spleen, kidneys, gallblad- the note will be resonant over the lungs, and work 
der and distal stomach all show downward movement vertically downwards.
during inspiration, due to the normal downward Over a normal liver, percussion will detect the 
diaphragmatic movement, and such structures cannot upper border, which is found at about the fifth 
be moved with the examining hand. Tumours of the intercostal space (just below the right nipple in 
small bowel and transverse colon, cysts in the mes- men). The dullness extends down to the lower 
entery and large secondary deposits in the greater border at or just below the right subcostal margin, 
omentum are not usually influenced by respiratory giving a normal liver vertical height of 12-15 cm. 
movements, but may easily move on palpation. The normal dullness over the upper part of the liver 

When the swelling is completely fixed, it usually is reduced in severe emphysema, in the presence of 
signifies one of three things: a large right pneumothorax and after laparotomy or 
1	 A mass of retroperitoneal origin (e.g. pancreas). laparoscopy.
2	 Part of an advanced tumour with extensive 

spread to the anterior or posterior abdominal Spleen
walls or abdominal organs. Percussion over a substantially enlarged spleen pro-

3	 A swelling resulting from severe chronic vides rapid confirmation of the findings detected on 
inflammation involving other organs (e.g. palpation (see Fig. 14.14). Dullness extends from the 
diverticulitis of the sigmoid colon or a left lower ribs into the left hypochondrium and left 
tuberculous ileocaecal mass). lumbar region.

In the lower abdomen, the side-to-side mobility of 
a fibroid or pregnant uterus rapidly establishes such Urinary bladder
a swelling as uterine in origin and as not arising from The findings in a patient with retention of urine are 
the urinary bladder. usually unmistakable on palpation (see Fig. 14.21). 

The dullness on percussion and clear difference from 
Is it bimanually palpable or pulsatile? the adjacent bowel provides reassurance that the 
Bimanually palpable swellings in the lumbar region swelling is cystic or solid and not gaseous.
are usually renal in origin. Occasionally, however, a 
posteriorly situated gallbladder or a mass in the Other masses
postero-inferior part of the right lobe of the liver The boundaries of any localized swelling in the 
may give the impression of being bimanually palpable. abdominal cavity or in the walls of the abdomen can 
Carefully note whether a swelling is pulsatile and sometimes be defined more accurately by percussion 
decide if any pulsation comes from the mass or is than palpation, as for the urinary bladder.
transmitted through it.

Detection of ascites and its differentiation from 
Percussion ovarian cyst and intestinal obstruction
Details of how to percuss correctly are given in There are three common causes of diffuse enlargement 
Chapter 12. The normal percussion note over most of the abdomen:



256 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Tympanitic Tympanitic

Tympanitic

Dull Dull

Gross ascites Large ovarian cyst Intestinal obstruction

Figure 14.24  Three types of diffuse enlargement of the abdomen. 

Box 14.4  Clinical features of marked abdominal swelling
Gross ascites
■	 Dull in flanks
■	 Umbilicus everted and/or hernia present
■	 Shifting dullness positive
■	 Fluid thrill positive
Large ovarian cyst
■	 Resonant in flank
■	 Umbilicus vertical and drawn up
■	 Large swelling felt arising out of pelvis which one 

cannot ‘get below’
Intestinal obstruction
■	 Resonant throughout Figure 14.25  Eliciting a fluid thrill. (The hand in the middle of 

the abdomen is that of an assistant.) 
■	 Colicky pain
■	 Vomiting
■	 Recent cessation of passage of stool and flatus
■	 Increased and/or ‘tinkling’ bowel sounds musculature), keep your fingers in that position and 

ask the patient to roll on to his left side. Wait a few 
seconds for any peritoneal fluid to redistribute and, 
if ascites is present, the percussion note will become 

1	 The presence of free fluid in the peritoneum resonant. This shift in the area of dullness can be 
(ascites). confirmed by finding the left border of dullness with 

2	 A massive ovarian cyst. the patient still on his left side and seeing if it shifts 
3	 Obstruction of the large bowel, distal small when the patient returns to the supine position or 

bowel or both. by repeating the original manoeuvre but towards the 
Percussion rapidly distinguishes between these three other side of the abdomen.

causes, as can be seen in Fig. 14.24. Other helpful To elicit a fluid thrill, the patient is again laid 
symptoms or signs which are usually present are supine. Place one hand flat over the lumbar region 
listed in Box 14.4. of one side, and get an assistant to put the side of 

The use of ultrasound to assess ascites has shown his hand longitudinally and firmly in the midline of 
that probably more than 2 litres of ascites needs to the abdomen. Then flick or tap the opposite lumbar 
be present to be detected clinically. It is unreliable region (Fig. 14.25). A fluid thrill or wave is felt as a 
to diagnose ascites unless there is sufficient free fluid definite and unmistakable impulse by the detecting 
present to give generalized enlargement of the hand held flat in the lumbar region. (The purpose 
abdomen. The cardinal sign created by ascites is of the assistant’s hand is to dampen any impulse that 
shifting dullness. A fluid thrill may also be present may be transmitted through the fat of the abdominal 
but it would be unwise to diagnose ascites based on wall.) As a rule, a fluid thrill is felt only when there 
this sign without the presence of shifting dullness. is a large amount of ascites present which is under 

To demonstrate shifting dullness, have the lie patient tension, and it is not a very reliable sign.
supine. Place your fingers in the longitudinal axis 
on the midline near the umbilicus and begin percus-
sion, moving your fingers laterally towards the right Auscultation
flank. When dullness is first detected (in normal Auscultation of the abdomen is for detecting bowel 
individuals, dullness is only over the lateral abdominal sounds and vascular bruits.



SECTION Three
257

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Bowel sounds
The stethoscope should be placed on one site on the 
abdominal wall (just to the right of and below the 
umbilicus is best) and kept there until sounds are 
heard. It should not be moved from site to site. 
Normal bowel sounds are heard as intermittent low- or 
medium-pitched gurgles interspersed with an occa-
sional high-pitched noise or tinkle.

In simple acute mechanical obstruction of the small 
bowel, the bowel sounds are excessive and exagger-
ated. Frequent, loud, low-pitched gurgles (borborygmi) 
are heard, often rising to a crescendo of high-pitched Figure 14.26  Palpating the groins to detect an expansile 

impulse on coughing. 
tinkles and occurring in a rhythmic pattern with 
peristaltic activity. The presence of such sounds 
occurring at the same time as the patient experiences canal; place the right hand similarly in the right groin 
bouts of colicky abdominal pain is highly suggestive (Fig. 14.26). Now ask the patient to give a loud cough 
of small bowel obstruction. In between the bouts of and feel for any expansile impulse with each hand. 
peristaltic activity and colicky pain, the bowel is quiet When a patient coughs, the muscles of the abdominal 
and no sounds are heard on auscultation. wall contract violently and this imparts a definite, 

If obstruction progresses leading to bowel necrosis, though not expansile, impulse to the palpating hands 
peristalsis ceases and sounds lessen in volume and which is a source of confusion to the inexperienced. 
frequency. In generalized peritonitis, bowel activity Trying to differentiate this normal contraction from 
rapidly disappears and a state of paralytic ileus ensues, a small, fully reducible inguinal hernia is difficult, 
with gradually increasing abdominal distension. The and the matter can usually be resolved only when 
abdomen is ‘silent’ but one must listen for several the patient is standing up.
minutes before being certain that there are no sounds. The femoral vessels have already been felt (see Fig. 
Frequently, towards the end of this period, a short 14.23) and auscultated. Now palpate along the femoral 
run of faint, very high-pitched tinkling sounds artery for enlarged inguinal nodes, feeling with the 
is heard. This represents fluid spilling over from fingers of the right hand, and carry this palpation 
one distended loop to another and is characteristic medially beneath the inguinal ligament towards the 
of ileus. perineum. Then repeat this on the left side.

A succussion splash may be heard without a 
stethoscope and also on auscultation when there is What to do if a patient complains of a lump in 
pyloric stenosis, in advanced intestinal obstruction the groin
with grossly distended loops of bowel and in paralytic 
ileus. Have the patient lie supine and place the A patient who complains of a lump in the groin 
stethoscope over the epigastrium. Shake the abdomen should be examined both lying down and standing 
briskly from side to side and, if the stomach is dis- up. A lump in the groin or scrotum is a common 
tended with fluid, a splashing sound will be heard. clinical problem in all age groups. Most lumps in the 

groin are due either to herniae or to enlarged inguinal 

Vascular bruits nodes; inguinal herniae are considerably more common 
than femoral, with an incidence ratio of 4:1. In the 

Listen for bruits by light application of the stethoscope scrotum, hydrocele of the tunica vaginalis or a cyst 
above and to the left of the umbilicus (aorta), the of the epididymis are common causes of painless 
iliac fossae (iliac arteries), epigastrium (coeliac or swelling; acute epididymo-orchitis is the most frequent 
superior mesenteric arteries), laterally in the mid- cause of a painful swelling. Generalized diseases such 
abdomen (renal arteries) or over the liver (increased as lymphoma may present as a lump in the groin. 
blood flow in liver tumours – classically primary liver Usually the diagnosis of a lump in the groin or scrotum 
cancer). If an arterial bruit is heard, it is a significant can be made simply and accurately.
finding which indicates turbulent flow in the Ask the patient to stand in front of you, get him 
underlying vessel, due to stenosis, aneurysm or a to point to the side and site of the swelling and note 
malignant circulation. whether it extends into the scrotum. Ask him to turn 

his head away from you and give a loud cough; look 
The groins for an expansile impulse and try to decide whether 

it is above or below the crease of the inguinal ligament. 
Once the groins have been inspected, ask the patient If an expansile impulse is present on inspection, it is 
to turn his head away from you and cough. Look at likely to be a hernia, so move to whichever side of 
both inguinal canals for any expansile impulse. If the patient the lump in the groin is on. Stand beside 
none is apparent, place the left hand in the left groin and slightly behind the patient. If the right groin is 
so that the fingers lie over and in line with the inguinal being examined, place the left hand over the right 



258 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Figure 14.28  Left hand: index finger occluding the deep inguinal 
ring. Right hand: index finger on the pubic tubercle. 

Figure 14.27  Locating the pubic tubercle. Note the position of 
the examiner, at the side of the patient, with one hand supporting the posterior wall of the inguinal canal, while in 
the buttock. an indirect hernia the impulse can often be seen 

to travel obliquely down the inguinal canal. 
Another helpful point is to place one finger just 

buttock to support the patient, the fingers of the above the mid-inguinal point over the deep 
right hand being placed obliquely over the inguinal inguinal ring (Fig. 14.28). If a hernia is fully 
canal. Now ask the patient to cough again. If an controlled by this finger, it must be an indirect 
expansile impulse is felt, then the lump must be a inguinal hernia.
hernia. Apart from a femoral hernia, the differential 

Next decide whether the hernia is inguinal or diagnosis of an inguinal hernia includes a large 
femoral. The best way to do this is to determine the hydrocele of the tunica vaginalis, a large cyst of the 
relationship of the sac to the pubic tubercle. To locate epididymis (one should be able to ‘get above’ and 
this structure, push gently upwards from beneath the feel the upper border of both of these in the scrotum), 
neck of the scrotum with the index finger (Fig. 14.27) an undescended or ectopic testis (there will be an 
but do not invaginate the neck of the scrotum as this empty scrotum on the affected side), a lipoma of the 
is painful. The tubercle will be felt as a small bony cord and a hydrocele of the cord.
prominence 2 cm from the midline on the pubic In considering the differential diagnosis of a femoral 
crest. In thin patients, the tubercle is easily felt but hernia, one must think not only of an inguinal hernia 
this is not so in the obese. If difficulty is found, follow but of a lipoma in the femoral triangle, an aneurysm 
up the tendon of adductor longus, which arises just of the femoral artery (expansile pulsation will be 
below the tubercle. present), a saphenovarix (the swelling disappears on 

If the hernial sac passes medial to and above the lying down, has a bluish tinge to it, there are often 
index finger placed on the pubic tubercle, then the varicose veins present and there may be a venous 
hernia must be inguinal in site; if it is lateral to and hum), a psoas abscess (the mass is fluctuant and may 
below, then the hernia must be femoral in site. be compressible beneath the inguinal ligament to 

If it has been decided that the hernia is inguinal, appear above it in the iliac fossa) and an enlarged 
then one needs to know these further points: inguinal lymph node. Whenever the latter is found, 
■	 What are the contents of the sac? Bowel tends the feet, legs, thighs, scrotum, perineum and the 

to gurgle and is soft and compressible, while pudendal and perianal areas must be carefully scru-
omentum feels firmer and is of a doughy tinized for a source of infection or primary tumour.
consistency. The examination is completed by examining the 

■	 Is the hernia fully reducible or not? It is best to opposite groin in a similar manner.
have the patient lie down to decide this. Ask 
the patient if he is ‘able to push the hernia back 
in’ and, if so, ask him to do so and confirm The male genitalia
yourself. (It is more painful if the examiner The examination of the genitalia is important in men 
reduces it.) presenting with abnormalities in the groin and in 

■	 Is the hernia direct or indirect? Again, it is best many acute or subacute abdominal syndromes. Thus, 
to have the patient lie down to decide this. disease of the genitalia may lead to abdominal 
Inspection of the direction of the impulse is symptoms, such as pain or swelling. It is vital to give 
often diagnostic, especially in thin patients. A a careful and ongoing explanation of what is involved 
direct hernia tends to bulge straight out through and why throughout this part of the examination. A 



SECTION Three
259

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
detailed description of the examination of the male distinguish a fistula-in-ano from a pilonidal sinus, 
genitalia is given in Chapter 17. where the opening lies in the midline of the natal 

cleft but well posterior to the anus.
The female genitalia There are a number of painful anorectal conditions 

that can usually be diagnosed readily on inspection. 
These are described in Chapters 5 and 17. As in men, An anal fissure usually lies directly posterior in the 
examination of the genitalia is an important part of midline. The outward pathognomonic sign of a chronic 
overall clinical examination, and it is vital to give a fissure is a tag of skin at the base (sentinel haemor-
careful and ongoing explanation of what is involved rhoid). If pain allows, the fissure can easily be 
and why throughout this part of the examination. demonstrated by gently drawing apart the anus to 

reveal the tear in the lining of the anal canal.
The anus and rectum A perianal haematoma (thrombosed external 
The left lateral position is best for routine examination haemorrhoid) occurs as a result of rupture of a vein 
of the rectum (Fig. 14.29). Make sure that the buttocks of the external haemorrhoidal plexus. It is seen as a 
project over the side of the couch with the knees small (1 cm), tense, bluish swelling on one aspect of 
drawn well up and that a good light is available. Put the anal margin and is exquisitely tender to the touch. 
on disposable gloves and stand behind the patient’s In prolapsed strangulated haemorrhoids, there is gross 
back, facing the patient’s feet. Explain to the patient swelling of the anal and perianal skin, which looks 
what you are about to do, that you will be as gentle like oedematous lips, with a deep red or purple 
as possible and that you will stop the examination, strangulated haemorrhoid appearing in between, and 
if requested, at any time. sometimes partly concealed by, the oedema of the 

swollen anus. In a perianal abscess, an acutely tender, 
Inspection red, fluctuant swelling is visible which deforms the 
Separate the buttocks carefully and inspect the peri- outline of the anus. It is usually easy to distinguish 
anal area and anus. Note the presence of any abnormal- this from an ischiorectal abscess where the anal verge 
ity of the perianal skin, such as inflammation or is not deformed, the signs of acute inflammation are 
excoriation, which may vary in appearance from mild often lacking and the point of maximum tenderness 
erythema to a raw, red, moist, weeping dermatitis or, is located midway between the anus and ischial 
in chronic cases, thickened white skin with exaggera- tuberosity.
tion of the anal skin folds. The latter form anal skin Note the presence of any ulceration. Finally, if rectal 
tags, which may follow not only severe pruritus but prolapse is suspected, ask the patient to bear down 
also occur when prolapsing haemorrhoids have been (as if trying to pass stool) and note whether any pink 
present over a period of time. Tags should not be rectal mucosa or bowel appears through the anus 
confused with anal warts (condylomata acuminata), or whether the perineum itself bulges downwards. 
which are sessile or pedunculated papillomata with Downward bulging of the perineum during straining 
a red base and a white surface. Anal warts may be on bending down or in response to a sudden cough 
so numerous as to surround the anal verge and even indicates weakness of the pelvic floor musculature, 
extend into the anal canal. Note any ‘hole’ or dimple usually due to denervation of these muscles. This sign 
near the anus with a telltale bead of pus or granulation is often found in women after childbirth, in women 
tissue surrounding it, which represents the external with faecal or urinary incontinence and in patients 
opening of a fistula-in-ano. It is usually easy to with severe chronic constipation.

Digital rectal examination (palpation)
Put a generous amount of lubricant on the gloved 
index finger of the right hand, place the pad of the 
finger (not the tip) flat on the anus (Figs 14.30 and 
14.31) and press firmly and slowly (flexing the finger) 
in a slightly backwards direction. After initial resist-
ance, the anal sphincter relaxes and the finger can 
be passed into the anal canal. If severe pain is elicited 
when attempting this manoeuvre, then further 
examination should be abandoned as it is likely the 
patient has a fissure and the rest of the examination 
will be very painful and unhelpful.

Feel for any thickening or irregularity of the wall 
of the canal, making sure that the finger is carefully 
turned through a full circle (180° each way). Assess 
the tone of the anal musculature; it should normally 
grip the finger firmly. If there is any doubt, ask the 

Figure 14.29  Left lateral position for rectal examination. patient to contract the anus on the examining finger. 



260 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿
malignant ulcers, proliferative and stenosing carcino-
mas, polyps and villous adenomas. The hollow of the 
sacrum and coccyx can be felt posteriorly. Laterally, 
on either side, it is usually possible to reach the side 
walls of the pelvis. In men, one should feel anteriorly 
for the rectovesical pouch, seminal vesicles (normally 
not palpable) and the prostate. In a patient with a 
pelvic abscess, however, pus gravitates to this pouch, 
which is then palpable as a boggy, tender swelling 
lying above the prostate. Malignant deposits will feel 
hard and, in infection of the seminal vesicles, these 
structures become palpable as firm, almost tubular 
swellings deviating slightly from the midline just 
above the level of the prostate.

Figure 14.30  Correct method for insertion of the index finger  Assessment of the prostate gland is important. It 
in rectal examination. The pad of the finger is placed flat against forms a rubbery, firm swelling about the size of a 
the anus. large walnut. Run the finger over each lateral lobe, 

which should be smooth and regular. Between the 
two lobes lies the median sulcus, which is palpable 
as a faint depression running vertically between each 
lateral lobe. While it is possible to say on rectal 
examination that a prostate is enlarged, accurate 
assessment of its true size only comes with a lot of 
experience. In carcinoma of the prostate, the gland 
loses its rubbery consistency and becomes hard, while 
the lateral lobes tend to be irregular and nodular and 
there is distortion or loss of the median sulcus.

The cervix is felt as a firm, rounded mass projecting 
back into the anterior wall of the rectum. This is 
often a disconcerting finding for the inexperienced. 
The body of a retroverted uterus, fibroid mass, ovarian 
cyst, malignant nodule or a pelvic abscess may all be 
palpated in the pouch of Douglas (rectouterine 
pouch), which lies above the cervix. This aspect of 
rectal examination forms an essential part of pelvic 

Figure 14.31  Incorrect method of introduction of the finger into 
the anal canal. assessment in female patients.

On withdrawing the finger after rectal examination, 
look at it for evidence of mucus, pus and blood, either 
fresh or altered. If in doubt, wipe the finger on a 

A cough will induce a brisk contraction of the external white swab. Finally, make sure to wipe the patient 
anal sphincter which should be readily appreciated. clean before telling the patient that the examination 
In the old and infirm with anal incontinence or is completed and also tell him to be careful as he 
prolapse, almost no appreciable contraction will be rolls to the supine position as he will be very near 
felt. With experience it is usually possible to feel a the edge of the couch or bed.
shallow groove just inside the anal canal which marks 
the dividing line between the external and internal 
sphincter. The anorectal ring may be felt as a stout The acute abdomen
band of muscle surrounding the junction between 
the anal canal and rectum. History

Now pass the finger into the rectum. The examiner’s 
left hand should be placed on the patient’s right hip The patient usually presents with acute abdominal 
and later it can be placed in the suprapubic position pain (which is also discussed in Chapter 9). Any pain, 
to exert downward pressure on the sigmoid colon. its site, severity, radiation, character, time and cir-
Try to visualize the anatomy of the rectum, particularly cumstances of onset and any aggravating or relieving 
in relation to its anterior wall. The rectal wall should features are all important.
be assessed with sweeping movements of the finger 
through 360°, 2, 5 and 8 cm inwards or until the Site
finger cannot be pushed any higher into the rectum. When the visceral peritoneum is predominantly 
Repeat these movements as the finger is being involved in an acute process, pain is often referred 
withdrawn. In this way it is possible to detect in a developmental distribution, and so when assessing 



SECTION Three
261

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
acute abdominal pain it is often helpful to think of free of pain for a further few minutes), is typical of 
the embryological development of the gut. Foregut small bowel obstruction. If such pain is suddenly 
structures are proximal to the duodenojejunal flexure relieved after a period of several hours of severe pain, 
and pain from here will often be felt in the upper perforation of a viscus should be considered. Large 
abdomen. The small bowel and the colon around to bowel obstruction produces a more constant pain 
the mid-transverse originate from the mid-gut and than small bowel obstruction, but colic is usually 
may produce pain in the periumbilical region, such prominent. Biliary and renal colic are also of variable 
as in the early phases of acute appendicitis. Pain from severity but with a longer period of variation than 
structures developing from the hind-gut will be felt small bowel colic and come on more quickly than 
in the lower abdomen. As any disease process advances they wear off.
and the parietal peritoneum is irritated, pain is felt 
at the site of the affected organ, such as in the right Mode of onset
iliac fossa in the later stages of acute appendicitis. In obstruction from mechanical disorders such as that 

Ask the patient to point to the site of maximal due to biliary or ureteric stone or obstruction of the 
pain with one finger. If pain is experienced mostly bowel from adhesions or volvulus, the onset of colicky 
in the upper abdomen, think of perforation of a pain is usually sudden. It is often related to activity 
gastric or duodenal ulcer, cholecystitis or pancreatitis. or movement in the previous few hours. In infective 
If pain is located in the mid-abdomen, disease of the and inflammatory disorders, the pain usually has a 
small bowel is likely. Pain in the right iliac fossa is slower onset, sometimes over several days, and there 
commonly due to appendicitis and pain in the left is no relation to activity. Alcohol excess or recent 
iliac fossa to diverticulitis. In women, the menstrual ingestion of a rich, heavy meal sometimes precedes 
history is important as low abdominal pain of acute pancreatitis. The ingestion of aspirin or non-steroidal 
onset is often due to salpingitis, but rupture of an anti-inflammatory drugs is sometimes a precipitating 
ectopic pregnancy should also be considered. The feature in patients presenting with perforated peptic 
coexistence of severe back and abdominal pain may ulcer or with haematemesis.
indicate a ruptured or dissecting abdominal aneurysm; 
alternatively, acute severe pancreatitis should be Relieving features
considered. The former is associated with cardio- Abdominal pain relieved by rest suggests an infective 
vascular collapse whilst the latter is associated with or inflammatory disorder. Pancreatic pain is classically 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). relieved by sitting forward.

Severity Vomiting
Try to assess the severity of the pain. Ask whether it A history of vomiting is not in itself very helpful 
keeps the patient awake. In women who have had because vomiting occurs as a response to pain of 
children, compare the severity with labour pains. any type. However, effortless projectile vomiting 
Sometimes comparison to the pain of a fractured often denotes pyloric stenosis or high small bowel 
bone is useful. Asking a patient to score the pain on obstruction. In peritonitis, the vomitus is usually 
a scale of 0-10 is useful for ongoing assessment and small in amount but vomiting is persistent. There 
monitoring of effectiveness of treatment. may be a faeculent smell to the vomitus when there 

is low small bowel obstruction. In bowel obstruction, 
Radiation vomiting may be an early or late sign depending on 
If pain radiates from the right subcostal region to the the level of obstruction. Persistent vomiting with 
shoulder or to the interscapular region, inflammation associated diarrhoea strongly suggests gastroenteritis. 
of the gallbladder (cholecystitis) is a likely diagnosis. It is unusual for patients with a perforated ulcer to 
If pain begins in the loin but then is felt in the lumbar vomit.
region, a renal stone or renal infection should be 
considered. Pain beginning in the loin and radiating Micturition
to the groin is likely to be due to a ureteric calculus, Increased frequency of micturition occurs both in 
and umbilical pain radiating to the right iliac fossa urinary tract infections and in other pelvic inflam-
is usually due to appendicitis. Central upper abdominal matory disorders as well as in patients with renal 
pain, later radiating through to the back, is common infections or ureteric stones. In the latter, haematuria 
in pancreatitis. commonly occurs. The presence of air or faeculent 

discolouration of urine is highly suspicious of an 
Character and constancy entero-vesical fistula.
Constant severe pain felt over many hours is likely 
to be due to infection. For example, diverticulitis or Appetite and weight
pyelonephritis can present in this manner. Colicky In patients with a chronic underlying disorder, 
pain, on the other hand (i.e. pain lasting a few seconds such as abdominal cancer, there may be a history 
or minutes and then passing off, leaving the patient of anorexia and weight loss, although weight loss 



262 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿
also occurs in a variety of other disorders. A dietary 
history is important for progressive weight loss but 
a sudden loss of appetite clearly indicates a disorder 
of sudden onset.

Other features
It is important to note whether there have been 
previous episodes of abdominal pain and whether or 
not they have been severe. The patient may have 
noticed swellings at the site of a hernial orifice, 
indicating the likelihood of an obstructed hernia, or 
there may be a history of blunt or penetrating 
abdominal trauma. Sometimes the patient may be 
aware of increasing abdominal distension, a phenom-
enon indicating intestinal obstruction or paralytic 
ileus probably associated with an inflammatory or 
infective underlying bowel disorder. Food poisoning 
may be suggested by a history of ingestion of unusual 
or under-prepared foods or a meal in unfamiliar 
surroundings. The menstrual history should never be 
forgotten, particularly in relation to the possibility 
of an ectopic pregnancy. Enquiry should always be 
made as to a purulent vaginal discharge, indicating 
salpingitis, or of discharge of mucus, pus or blood Figure 14.32  Plain X-ray of the abdomen. Obstruction of the 
from the rectum, suggesting inflammatory bowel large bowel due to carcinoma of the sigmoid colon. Most of the 

colon is dilated with gas, indicating obstruction, but there appears 
disease. to be no gas below the sigmoid region. 

Examination
spasm, the abdominal wall will be felt to relax during 

There are certain features that are important in all expiration.
patients presenting with an acute abdominal crisis. 
An assessment of the vital signs and of the patient Rebound tenderness
in general is essential. The physical signs found on Rebound tenderness is present if when palpating 
inspection and on auscultation of the abdomen have slowly and deeply over a viscus and then suddenly 
already been discussed above in the relevant releasing the palpating hand, the patient experiences 
sections. sudden pain. Rebound tenderness is not always a 
Guarding reliable sign and should be interpreted with caution, 

particularly in those patients with a low pain threshold, 
Guarding is an involuntary reflex contraction of the but is often a useful adjunct to detecting peritoneal 
muscles of the abdominal wall overlying an inflamed inflammation.
viscus and peritoneum, producing localized rigidity. 
It indicates localized peritonitis. What is felt on Percussion
examination is spasm of the muscle, which prevents The absence of dullness over the liver can indicate 
palpation of the underlying viscus. Guarding is seen free intraperitoneal gas and hence a perforated viscus.
classically in uncomplicated acute appendicitis. It is 
very important to distinguish this sign from voluntary Radiology
contraction of muscle. A plain X-ray of the abdomen is an important immedi-
Rigidity ate investigation in the diagnosis of the acute abdomen, 

especially in suspected perforation or obstruction 
Generalized or ‘board-like’ rigidity is an indication (Fig. 14.32). An erect chest X-ray may also demon-
of diffuse peritonitis. It can be looked upon as strate free air under the diaphragm although this is 
an extension of guarding, with involuntary reflex not always completely reliable.
rigidity of the muscles of the anterior abdominal 
wall. It is quite unmistakable on palpation, as the 
whole abdominal wall feels hard and ‘board like’, Examination of abdominal fluids
precluding palpation of any underlying viscus. The 
least downward pressure with a palpating hand in Examination of vomit
a patient with generalized rigidity produces severe 
pain. It may be differentiated from voluntary spasm The character of the vomit varies with the nature of 
by getting the patient to breathe: if there is voluntary the food ingested and the absence or presence of 



SECTION Three
263

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
bile, blood or intestinal obstruction. In pyloric stenosis, cholera, the stools – known as rice-water stools – are 
the vomit is usually copious and sour-smelling, colourless, almost devoid of odour, alkaline in reaction 
containing recognizable food eaten many hours before and contain a number of small flocculi consisting of 
and exhibiting froth on the surface after standing. shreds of epithelium and particles of mucus. Purulent 
The presence of much mucus gives vomit a viscid or pus-containing stools are found in severe dysentery 
consistency. Brisk haematemesis such as from a large or ulcerative colitis. Slimy stools are due to the pres-
vessel in an ulcer will cause the patient to vomit ence of an excess of mucus and point to a disorder 
essentially pure blood. Bright red blood that is of the large bowel. The mucus may envelop the faecal 
‘vomited’ nearly always originates from the naso- or masses or may be intimately mixed with them.
oropharynx and not from the stomach. Slower upper- Bloody stools vary in appearance according to the 
GI bleeding leads to the blood mixing with gastric site of the haemorrhage. If the bleeding takes place 
juice and becoming darker with an appearance likened high up, the stools look like tar. In an intussusception, 
to ground coffee. they may look like red-currant jelly. Large bowel 

Vomit which contains dark green bile may resemble bleeding above the rectum may produce darker red 
vomit which contains blood but usually red and green visible blood whereas bleeding from the rectum or 
parts can be distinguished. Faeculent vomit, charac- anus may streak the faeces bright red, and haemor-
teristic of advanced intestinal obstruction, is brown rhoidal bleeding may just be found on the toilet 
in colour, rather like vomited tea, and has faecal paper. A brisk upper-GI bleed can lead to bright red 
odour. Vomit containing formed faeces is rare but rectal bleeding (haematochezia).
indicates a communication between the stomach and The stools of bacillary dysentery initially consist 
transverse colon, usually from a colonic carcinoma. of faecal material mixed with blood and pus, later 

of blood and pus without faecal material. Those of 
Examination of faeces amoebic dysentery characteristically consist of fluid 

faecal material, mucus and small amounts of blood. 
Examination of the faeces is all too easily omitted. The stools of steatorrhoea are very large, pale and 
No patient with bowel disturbance has been properly putty- or porridge-like, sometimes frothy with 
examined until the stools have been inspected. a visible oily film, and often float. They are apt to 
Faecal amount stick to the sides of the toilet and are difficult to 

flush away.
Note whether the stools are copious or scanty, and 
whether they are hard, formed, semi-formed or liquid. Tests for faecal occult blood
Faecal character is usually defined using the Bristol 
Stool Chart; this standardized descriptor is of par- Several methods are available. For reasons of ease of 
ticular use in monitoring progress in infective or use and safety, the guaiac test (Haemoccult) is the 
inflammatory diarrhea. most widely used. A filter paper impregnated with 

guaiac turns blue in the presence of haemoglobin 
Faecal colour when hydrogen peroxide is added. The test depends 
Black stools may be produced by altered blood or on the oxidation of guaiac in the presence of hae-
the ingestion of iron or bismuth. In haemorrhage moglobin. Other substances with peroxidase activity, 
occurring high up in the intestine, the altered blood including dietary substances such as bananas, pine
makes the stools dark, tarry-looking and with the apple, broccoli and radishes, can produce a false-
characteristic and offensive smell of melaena. Pallor positive reaction, and ascorbic acid may cause 
of the stools may be due to lack of entrance of bile false-negative results. Therefore, dietary preparation 
into the intestine, as in obstructive jaundice; to dilution is necessary for accurate screening, for example, when 
and rapid passage of the stool through the intestine screening a population in the early detection of colonic 
as in diarrhoea; or to an abnormally high fat content cancer. In ordinary clinical use, the test is sensitive 
as in malabsorption. to faecal blood losses of about 20 ml per day. This 

test can be used on patients on a normal diet but it 
Faecal odour may not detect small amounts of GI bleeding. The 
The stools in jaundice are often very offensive. Cholera test may be negative in the presence of lesions which 
stools, on the other hand, contain very little organic bleed intermittently or slightly, particularly those 
matter and are almost free from odour. The stools of situated in the upper GI tract. Spectroscopic methods 
acute bacillary dysentery are almost odourless, while and isotopic methods using radiolabelled red cells 
those of amoebic dysentery have a characteristic that can localize the source of bleeding in the gut 
odour, something like that of semen. Melaena stools are also available.
have a characteristic smell.

Tests for faecal fat
Abnormal stools Fat is present in food as neutral fat or triglyceride. It 
Watery stools are found in all cases of profuse diar- is split to greater or lesser degrees by lipases, mainly 
rhoea and after the administration of purgatives. In from the pancreas, into glycerol and fatty acids. Some 



264 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿
of the fatty acids, if unabsorbed, combine with bases puncture, a 20-ml syringe and an 18-gauge needle 
to form soaps. Fat may therefore be found in the can be used; clotting and platelet abnormalities do 
faeces as neutral fat, fatty acids and soaps. not require correcting. If a significant quantity of 

The estimation of the proportion of split and unsplit fluid is intended to be drained, efforts should be 
fats present has been found unreliable as a method made to normalize haematological abnormalities 
of distinguishing pancreatic from non-pancreatic (liaison with a haematologist may be required) to 
steatorrhoea because of the effects of bacterial activity minimize risk of haemorrhage. A trochar and flanged 
on neutral fats. cannula or catheter (which can be fixed to the skin 

For the estimation of the fat in the stools, the with adhesive dressing) should be employed (a peri-
patient may be placed on a diet containing 50 g of toneal dialysis or suprapubic catheter is often suitable). 
fat per day. The fat present in the stools collected A diagnostic tap should be performed before inserting 
over at least 3 days is then estimated and should not the trochar and cannula to ensure that fluid can be 
exceed 6 g/day (11-18 mmol/day). It has been found obtained at the chosen site. A tiny incision should 
that equally reliable results are obtained if the patient be made in the anaesthetized area of the skin before 
eats a normal diet, provided a 3-5 day collection the trochar and cannula are inserted. The cannula is 
is made. attached to a drainage bag and the drainage rate 

Faecal fat testing has largely been replaced by the should be limited to 1 litre/hour. Because of the risk 
measurement of faecal elastase which, if reduced of infection, the drainage catheter should not be left 
below a reference value, usually indicates pancreatic in situ for more than 6 hours. Human albumin solution 
exocrine insufficiency. is usually used to replace volume (8 g/l ascites 

removed). In general, diuretics are preferable to 
Stool microbiology therapeutic drainage for the management of chronic 
Reliable microbiological examination of the stool is ascites, but the latter can have a place in therapy.
vital for accurate diagnosis of acute and chronic The fluid withdrawn is sent for bacteriological and 
diarrhoea. All stool samples for microbiological cytological examination and chemical analysis. 
examination should get to the laboratory as fresh as Transudates, such as occur in heart failure, cirrhosis 
possible, and if amoebic or similar infection is sus- and nephrotic syndrome, normally have a protein 
pected, then microscopy should be performed with content under 25 g/l (i.e. less than two-thirds the 
the stool still as close to body temperature as possible concentration of albumin in the plasma). Exudates 
(a ‘hot’ stool). occurring in tuberculous peritonitis or in the presence 

Any microbiological finding must be correlated of secondary malignancy usually contain more than 
with the history, as many patients are healthy carriers 25 g/l of protein. This method of distinction, however, 
of organisms that can be pathogenic in other situations. is somewhat unreliable. It is now routine to calculate 
If Clostridium difficile infection is suspected in a the serum-albumin ascites gradient (SAAG); a value 
patient with diarrhoea following the use of antibiotics, of ≥11 g/l suggests that the ascites is secondary to 
the laboratory must be asked to look for the portal hypertension.
Clostridium toxin in preference to the organism. Lymphocytes in the fluid are characteristic features 

of tuberculous peritonitis but acid-fast bacilli are 
Aspiration of peritoneal fluid often not seen on staining. Blood-stained fluid strongly 

suggests a malignant cause, and malignant cells may 
Aspiration of peritoneal fluid (paracentesis abdominis) also be demonstrated (Fig. 14.33). If pancreatic 
is undertaken for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. pathology is suspected, the amylase content of the 
Most patients with significant ascites should have an fluid should be measured.
initial diagnostic aspiration to help differentiate the In ascites due to cirrhosis, 10 ml of the sample 
causes. Cirrhotic patients with ascites whose condition should be inoculated into blood culture bottles. 
deteriorates need the complication of spontaneous However, in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, the 
bacterial peritonitis excluded because it has no specific cultures are often negative and the diagnosis is primar-
signs, has a significant mortality and substantially ily based on the finding of >250 or more neutrophils 
affects prognosis. Therapeutic paracentesis may be per mm3 fluid and an unexpectedly high protein 
needed in cirrhotic patients for whom diuretics are content, results which should lead to the use of 
contraindicated or have not worked, and in patients appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics.
with ascites due to malignancy.

The patient should be lying flat or propped up at 
a slight angle. The aspiration is usually performed in Special techniques in the examination of 
the flanks, a little outside the mid-point of a line the GI tract
drawn from the umbilicus to the anterior superior 
iliac spine. With suitable sterile precautions, the skin There are a number of common and important 
at the point chosen should be infiltrated with local methods of examining the oesophagus, stomach and 
anaesthetic and the anaesthetic then injected down duodenum, the small and large intestine, the liver, 
to the parietal peritoneum. For a simple diagnostic gallbladder, biliary tree and pancreas.



SECTION Three
265

Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Figure 14.33  Ascites cytology. A group of tumour cells showing 
random orientation and large abnormal nucleoli indicating 
malignancy. Ascitic fluid from patient with ovarian carcinoma. 
May-Grünwald-Giemsa stain ×160. 

Figure 14.35  Endoscopic view of a duodenal ulcer that has 
recently bled with a visible blood vessel on its surface. 

Oesophageal function studies
The oesophageal phase of swallowing can be assessed 
by barium swallow and may show slowing or arrest 
of transit of the food bolus in the oesophagus. In 
special clinical applications, manometric studies of 
pressure changes during swallowing are used to 
localize functional abnormalities in the coordination 
of oesophageal peristalsis, for example achalasia and 
oesophageal spasm. In patients with epigastric and 
retrosternal discomfort (heartburn) related to eating 
or to lying supine, reflux of acid from the stomach 
into the lower oesophagus should be suspected. Acid 
reflux can best be detected by monitoring the pH in 

Figure 14.34  A patient undergoing endoscopy of the upper GI the lower oesophagus during a 24-hour period. The 
tract. The plastic guard between the teeth prevents the instrument pH measuring probe, passed via the nose, is placed 
from being bitten. The patient may have received pharyngeal local in the lower oesophagus, 5 cm above the oesophago-
anaesthetic spray or light sedation with midazolam. gastric junction, for 24 hours and the pH recorded 

continuously. The patient indicates when pain is 
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy experienced by pressing an electronic marker on the 

recorder to see if there is a correlation with the degree 
In the last 40 years or so, the developments of the of acidity. This investigation has found a major clinical 
fibreoptic endoscope, and more recently of video- application in the differential diagnosis of acid reflux 
endoscopy, have revolutionized the assessment of the pain from atypical cardiac pain. A combined pH and 
upper GI tract (Fig. 14.34). With these instruments impedance recording can also detect non-acid reflux.
it is possible to inspect directly as far as the proximal 
small bowel, with or without conscious sedation and Gastric secretory studies and serum 
local pharyngeal anaesthesia. Because of the ability gastrin levels
to photograph and biopsy any suspicious lesions, this 
technique is the investigation of choice for demonstrat- Measurement of acid secretion by the stomach was 
ing structural abnormalities in the upper gut. Thera- formerly frequently used for the assessment of patients 
peutic endoscopy is now the treatment of choice for with peptic ulcer disease, and for the diagnosis of 
bleeding varices, oesophageal obstruction and in most hyperacidity caused by the rare gastrin-secreting 
cases of bleeding peptic ulcer (Fig. 14.35). In inoper- tumours (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome), but serum 
able cancer of the oesophagus, palliative prostheses gastrin estimation is now the investigation of choice.
(stents) can be inserted endoscopically. Enteral In normal subjects, the basal acid output is no more 
nutrition may be delivered via percutaneous endo- than a few millilitres per hour, containing up to 
scopic gastrostomy tubes. 10 mmol/l of hydrogen ions. The maximal acid output, 



266 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿
measured during 1 hour after the administration of 
pentagastrin (6.0 mg/kg body weight), a synthetic 
analogue of the naturally occurring human hormone 
gastrin, may reach 27 mmol/l/h in males, and 
25 mmol/l/h in females. In most patients with 
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, the ratio of basal to 
maximum acid secretion is raised as much as sixfold.

Measurement of serum gastrin is made fasting, after 
quite a long period without acid-suppression therapy, 
and collected into special preservative. In Zollinger-
Ellison patients, the level of gastrin in the serum is 
increased above 100 ng/l. Serum gastrin levels are 
also increased in renal failure, pernicious anaemia, 
after vagotomy and during acid-suppression therapy.

Tests for Helicobacter pylori
The role of infection by Helicobacter pylori in the Figure 14.36  Plain X-ray of the chest showing gas under the 
pathogenesis of gastric and duodenal ulceration is right and left diaphragms after perforation of the duodenal ulcer. 
well documented, although an exact causative link The patient was admitted in shock with abdominal pain and 
is less well understood. H. pylori is a Gram-negative abdominal rigidity. 
spiral bacillus. The organism is found in the gastric 
antrum in about 60% of patients with gastritis or 
gastric ulceration and in almost all patients with value in cases of suspected peritonitis due to a per-
duodenal ulceration. There are many asymptomatic forated viscus, when gas may be seen under the 
carriers in the general population. Patients carrying diaphragm, usually on the right side (Fig. 14.36). A 
H. pylori in the stomach will have IgG antibodies in plain abdominal X-ray is useful in suspected intestinal 
the serum and these will remain present for a long obstruction or ileus when dilated bowel loops may 
period after successful treatment; serological testing be seen with fluid levels appearing on the erect X-ray. 
is therefore no longer recommended. H. pylori can It is important to use a plain abdominal X-ray to 
be detected by microscopy or culture of gastric exclude toxic megacolon in fulminant colitis.
mucosal biopsies obtained during endoscopy and by 
stool antigen testing. Barium swallow

H. pylori is rich in urease. In a simple clinical test, The direct observation of the passage of a radiopaque 
a gastric biopsy is placed in contact with a pellet or barium solution through the pharynx and oesophagus 
solution containing urea and a coloured pH indicator. into the stomach remains an important investigation 
The colour of the substrate changes when the pH is of dysphagia. In addition to structural abnormalities 
greater than 6, indicating the conversion of urea to such as neoplasia or stricture, disorders of motor 
ammonia by urease in H. pylori. A variant of this function can be detected which might otherwise 
method utilises 13C-labelled urea given to the patient escape diagnosis. Lack of progress of barium through 
by mouth. The patient’s breath is monitored for an apparently normal lower oesophageal sphincter 
labelled carbon dioxide, indicating breakdown of the on swallowing in a patient with dysphagia usually 
ingested urea by urease-containing organisms in the indicates the presence of achalasia, a disorder of 
upper-GI tract. In the community and before endos- neuromuscular coordination of the oesophageal body 
copy is indicated or performed, detection of the stool and failure of the lower sphincter to relax.
antigen for H. pylori is now the most widely used A careful radiological assessment of the stomach 
method. 13C-labelled urea breath testing should be and duodenum, which has been coated with swallowed 
used to confirm successful eradication. barium and then inflated with a gas-forming tablet, 

H. pylori can be rendered undetectable but not has the ability to demonstrate benign ulcers and 
eradicated by acid-suppression therapy, which should tumours as well as assessing gastric outflow. However, 
be stopped 2 weeks before any testing for reliable the ability to take endoscopic biopsies has meant 
results (other than stool antigen testing or histology that barium radiology is now a secondary investigation 
of gastric biopsies). to upper GI endoscopy.

Radiology of the upper  Small intestine
gastrointestinal tract

Barium follow-through studies
Plain radiographs The small intestine may be studied by taking sequen-
Plain radiographs of the chest and abdomen with the tial X-rays of the abdomen after swallowing barium 
patient supine and in the erect position are of great contrast. Abnormalities in the transit time to the 



SECTION Three
267

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
colon and in small bowel pattern (e.g. dilation, nar- there is no IgA deficiency), but a biopsy is essential 
rowing, increase in transverse barring or flocculation) to fully complete or fully exclude the diagnosis. The 
may be demonstrated in malabsorptive states. Areas low-power view of the villi is as important as the 
of narrowing with proximal dilatation, fistulae and detailed histology. Other malabsorption problems 
mucosal abnormalities may be produced by Crohn’s such as Whipple’s disease and chronic giardiasis may 
disease. Small bowel diverticula or neoplasms may also be seen on duodenal biopsy.
also be demonstrated. The amount and type of barium 
used for examination of the stomach/duodenum and Magnetic resonance scanning
of the small bowel is different, and so a barium Magnetic resonance scanning is now replacing barium 
follow-through should be requested as a specific radiology for assessing areas of stricturing and inflam-
examination and not as an add-on to a barium meal. mation in the small bowel.
Small-bowel enema
Small-bowel enema is an alternative to the barium Colon, rectum and anus
follow-through examination and involves intubating 
the duodenum and passing small quantities of a Proctoscopy
non-flocculating barium suspension down the tube. The anal canal and lower rectum can be readily visual-
This method is useful for detecting isolated focal ized with a rigid proctoscope. Place the patient in 
lesions and strictures but in most centres has been the position described for rectal examination and 
replaced by MR enterography and/or double balloon gently pass the lubricated instrument to its full depth. 
enteroscopy. Remove the obturator and inspect the mucosa as the 

instrument is slowly withdrawn and air gently insuf-
Radioisotope studies flated. Haemorrhoids are seen as reddish/blue swellings 
In inflammatory bowel disease, the location of the which bulge into the lumen of the instrument. Asking 
disease and a measure of its activity can be obtained the patient to strain down as the proctoscope is 
by radioisotope studies using the patient’s own white withdrawn exaggerates any haemorrhoids. The internal 
blood cells that have been radiolabelled. opening of an anal fistula, an anal or low rectal polyp 

and a chronic anal fissure are other abnormalities 
Selective angiography of  that may be seen.
gastrointestinal arteries

Rigid sigmoidoscopy and other tests in  
Angiography is occasionally used in the investigation 
of haematemesis or melaena when gastroscopy and chronic diarrhoea
colonoscopy fail to identify the bleeding source. It is Proctitis, polyps and carcinomas may be seen and 
most useful if performed when the patient is actively biopsies taken. Sigmoidoscopy is particularly useful 
bleeding but may be of value if an aneurysm or in the differential diagnosis of diarrhoea of colonic 
abnormal tumour vasculature is present, and it can origin. Granularity, loss of vascular pattern and ulcera-
occasionally detect angiomas. It is an invasive tech- tion with bleeding may indicate the presence of 
nique that demands a great deal of skill on the part ulcerative colitis, aphthous ulceration may suggest 
of the radiologist. It is sometimes possible to use Crohn’s disease, and multiple rounded white macules 
therapeutic embolization to treat haemorrhage. may be diagnostic of pseudomembranous colitis due 

to Clostridium difficile toxin, usually following antibiotic 
Small intestine endoscopy and biopsy treatment. In suspected amoebic dysentery, the 
Samples of small intestine mucosa are valuable for mucous membrane should be inspected and portions 
histological diagnosis in various types of malabsorption. of mucus and scrapings from the ulcerated mucosa 
Direct biopsy of the lower duodenum at conventional may be removed and examined microscopically for 
upper GI endoscopy is usually sufficient for diagnosis amoebic cysts.
of coeliac disease but jejunal tissue can also be Urine tests for purgative abuse are useful in the 
obtained using push-type flexible enteroscopes. investigation of persistent unexplained diarrhoea but 
Endoscopic techniques for biopsying have now largely not widely available.
replaced remote biopsy by the Crosby capsule. If 
necessary, full-thickness jejunal biopsies, useful for Barium enema
diagnosing neuromuscular gut disorders, can be Prior to barium enema, the patient must have his 
obtained by laparoscopy. Excellent endoscopic images bowel prepared with a vigorous laxative, as residual 
of the whole of the small bowel can now be obtained stool or fluid can be mistaken for polyps and other 
by wireless capsule endoscopy but, as yet, biopsies lesions. Impending obstruction is a contraindication 
are not possible by this method. to this laxative preparation. A plain X-ray of the 

If coeliac disease is suspected, serum antibodies to abdomen should always be taken in patients with 
gliadin, reticulin, endomysial and tissue transglutami- suspected perforation or obstruction before consider-
nidase antigens are a useful screening test (provided ing a contrast study (see Fig. 14.32).



268 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Figure 14.37  Barium enema with air contrast. The right colon is 
outlined by barium sulfate and the rectum, left colon and part of Figure 14.38  Barium enema with air contrast. In this patient 
the transverse colon are outlined by air with a thin mucosal layer with ulcerative colitis, the normal mucosal pattern and the 
of barium sulfate. Note the normal haustral pattern in the colon haustra themselves have been obliterated. The patient is lying on 
and the smooth appearance of the rectum. The anal canal can his right side so that there are clear fluid levels in the barium 
also be seen. sulphate suspension in the bowel. 

Barium suspension is introduced via a tube into colon preparation (similar to barium enema X-ray) 
the rectum as an enema and the patient is repositioned but is also an outpatient procedure. Conscious sedation 
to move the contrast around the rest of the colon. may be used. These techniques are invaluable for 
Radiological screening is performed with the barium obtaining tissue for diagnosis of inflammatory and 
in situ and after it has been evacuated. By this means, neoplastic disease and for removal of neoplastic polyps 
obstruction to the colon, tumours, diverticular disease, (Figs 14.39 and 14.40). Dilation of strictures, stenting 
fistulae and other abnormalities can be recognized. or other thermal treatments of obstructing tumours 

Following evacuation, air is introduced into the can also be applied during endoscopy.
colon. This improves visualization of the mucosa and A skilled colonoscopist should reach the caecum 
is especially valuable for detecting small lesions such in >90% of examinations attempted and the terminal 
as polyps and early tumours (Figs 14.37 and 14.38). ileum in 50%. There is a small risk (1:1000) of colonic 

Patients often find the preparation and procedure perforation associated with the colonoscopy.
uncomfortable and there is a very small risk of 
perforating the colon. The inability to take diagnostic 
samples and the advent of CT colonography means The liver
that barium enemas are now rarely used for diagnostic 
purposes. Biochemical tests in liver disorders

Biochemical tests are used in the differential diagnosis 
Colonoscopy and flexible sigmoidoscopy of jaundice, to detect liver cell damage in other 
As in the upper gut, the use of flexible fibreoptic disorders and to monitor the results of medical 
and video instruments has revolutionized the investiga- and surgical treatments of the liver, pancreas and 
tion of the colon. Both sigmoidoscopes and colono- biliary systems. Tests include plasma bilirubin, 
scopes are available. The former instrument may be alkaline phosphatase, serum aminotransferases, plasma 
employed in an outpatient setting after a simple proteins and prothrombin time. Serum gamma glu-
enema preparation; the latter requires more extensive tamyl transferase levels are especially sensitive to 



SECTION Three
269

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
give information about activity and ongoing disease 
and, in the latter, detection of the viral DNA is helpful.

Needle biopsy of liver
Percutaneous needle biopsy is the standard technique 
for obtaining liver tissue for histological examination. 
While needle biopsy can be conducted under local 
anaesthesia (sometimes with mild sedation), it should 
be carried out only in hospital by fully experienced 
staff. Generally, the method is safe and reliable but 
there is a tiny but definite mortality from the pro-
cedure due to leakage of bile and/or blood into the 
peritoneal cavity from the puncture site. The proce-
dure should therefore always be regarded as a 

Figure 14.39  View of colonic epithelium at colonoscopy, showing potentially dangerous investigation for which there 
severe ulcerative colitis with extensive ulceration and bleeding. should be a clear beneficial indication for the patient 

and should be performed by an appropriately trained 
operator. Liver biopsy under ultrasound guidance is 
preferable and can allow targeting of specific abnor-
malities and give confidence of a safer procedure. 
Contraindications to biopsy include patients with 
abnormal clotting times or thrombocytopaenia, 
obstructive jaundice or ascites.

Ultrasound scanning
In ultrasound scanning a probe emitting ultrasonic 
pulses is passed across the abdomen. Echoes detected 
from within the patient are received with a transducer, 
amplified and suitably displayed. This technique is 
the most commonly used non-invasive imaging 

Figure 14.40  Colonoscopic view of a tubulovillous adenoma. modality for the liver. It can identify cirrhosis and 
small metastases and is helpful in the diagnosis of 
fluid-filled lesions such as cysts and abscesses. Fine 

liver dysfunction as, for example, in alcohol-related needle aspiration of suspicious lesions can be under-
liver disease. taken under direct ultrasound guidance for cytology 

Smooth muscle antibodies are commonly present and for drainage of fluid, bile or pus.
in the blood in chronic active hepatitis, and other The gallbladder is most easily investigated by 
autoantibody studies are used in the investigation of ultrasound. It appears as an echo-free structure. If 
chronic inflammatory liver disease. Anti-mitochondrial stones are present, they are usually easily seen as 
antibodies are found in the blood in primary biliary mobile and echo-dense with a characteristic ‘acoustic 
cirrhosis in over 90% of cases. shadow’ behind them. Ultrasound detects 95% of 

Liver disease due to excess iron or copper accumula- gallbladder stones but only about 50% of stones in 
tion can be detected by measurements of these metals the bile ducts themselves. Ultrasound is particularly 
and their carrier proteins in blood (or urine for valuable in detecting dilation of the bile duct which 
copper). In primary haemochromatosis, genetic studies may be due to partial or complete obstruction by 
are very useful in diagnosis. Serum alpha-foetoprotein gallstones or tumour. Ultrasound has replaced oral 
is often raised in primary liver cell cancer, which can cholecystography for imaging the gallbladder.
complicate any cause of cirrhosis, or the carriage of Ultrasound is the usual initial technique for inves-
hepatitis B or C. tigating the pancreas, is particularly useful in the 

diagnosis of true and pseudopancreatic cysts and is 
Viral hepatitis an essential tool for percutaneous needle biopsy. 
The presence of ongoing carriage of viral hepatitis is However, images may be obscured by overlying bowel 
initially detected by antigen testing (for hepatitis B) gas and the tail of the pancreas is poorly visualized. 
and by antibody testing for hepatitis C, D and E. Ultrasound is used extensively for examining other 
Active infection is detected by finding IgM antibody intra-abdominal, pelvic and retroperitoneal organs 
(for hepatitis A, B, D and E), and by polymerase and increasingly for imaging the bowel in inflammatory 
chain reaction (PCR) testing for the viral RNA conditions such as in Crohn’s disease. Blood flow 
(hepatitis C). At least two antigens and antibodies patterns (such as in the portal vein) can be assessed 
of hepatitis B can be detected (surface and E) which by ultrasound using the Doppler principle.



270 14 Gastrointestinal system ﻿

Isotope scanning Endoscopic ultrasound
Technetium-labelled red blood cells can be used to Endoscopic ultrasound is more sensitive in staging 
detect the location of sources of bleeding in the GI the mucosal depth of penetration of cancers in the 
tract. Isotopes taken up in the bile (hepatobiliary oesophagus and stomach than CT scanning and is 
iminodiacetic acid, HIDA) can give images of the frequently better at lymph node detection but is less 
gallbladder and biliary tree, and give some information effective at detecting distant metastases. It is also 
as to the functioning of these organs. Technetium- valuable in assessing biliary and pancreatic abnormali-
labelled white cells can be used to localize inflamed ties. Endoscopic ultrasound has the advantage of 
bowel segments in inflammatory bowel disease, and guiding fine needle aspiration cytology as well as 
both the small and large bowel can be imaged with other endoscopic interventions.
the same test. (Isotope liver scans have largely been 
superseded by the use of ultrasound.) Magnetic resonance imaging
Computed tomography scanning Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 

(MRCP) can give high-quality images of the bile duct 
Computed tomography (CT) can be used to produce and pancreatic duct. The safety of this non-invasive 
cross-sectional images of the liver and other intra- technique has reduced the need for more invasive 
abdominal and retroperitoneal organs. It is particularly and hazardous examinations such as endoscopic 
helpful in assessing patients with cancer of the retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which 
oesophagus, stomach, pancreas and colon (Fig. 14.41). is reserved for patients requiring therapeutic interven-
Because it can be combined with injection of vascular tion. Magnetic resonance is increasingly used to image 
contrast, it can be helpful in assessing intra-abdominal the small bowel in Crohn’s disease and also to 
vascular abnormalities. It can facilitate guided biopsy characterize liver lesions.
of abnormalities, and drainage of fluid and other 
collections. It is also increasingly being used to image 
the bowel, particularly if there is suspected obstruc- Endoscopic retrograde 
tion, and is widely used in assessing patients with an cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
acute abdomen. Clinicians should be aware of the Using a special side-viewing duodenoscope, the 
radiation exposure associated with CT scanning and duodenal papilla is identified and a cannula passed 
caution should be exercised for younger patients in through it into the common bile duct. Radiopaque 
particular. contrast is then injected into the cannula and the 

Positron emission tomography scanning whole of the biliary system is visualized. The technique 
is useful in the rapid diagnosis and localization of 

Radiolabelled isotopes that are taken up by cell the different causes of jaundice due to obstruction 
metabolism are injected intravenously and the of the main bile ducts. Needle or forceps biopsy and 
radiation that is detected is reconstructed into a brush cytology may give a specific diagnosis of 
cross-sectional image by the same techniques as for strictures of the biliary tree. ERCP has an important 
CT. It is a particularly sensitive technique for staging therapeutic role in the treatment of jaundice because 
cancers, particular if the CT images are acquired at it allows the removal of bile duct stones or the place-
the same time. ment of stents which are tubes that facilitate the 

passage of bile into the duodenum past obstructing 
lesions such as tumours of the pancreas or bile duct. 
More novel techniques allow direct visualization of 
the biliary system. Such therapies often involve 
performing a sphincterotomy during ERCP using a 
cutting diathermy wire passed into the bile duct via 
the ampulla. The sphincterotomy opens the ampulla 
and may allow the delivery of stones in the bile duct.

The entire pancreatic duct system can be visualized 
at ERCP. The technique is therefore valuable in the 
diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. In patients with 
pancreatic carcinoma, a needle biopsy can be per-
formed at ERCP, and brush cytology of the pancreatic 
duct may also provide histological confirmation of 
the diagnosis. ERCP carries a small mortality and 
may be complicated by pancreatitis, bleeding, perfora-

Figure 14.41  CT demonstrating liver metastases from colonic tion or infection. Prophylactic antibiotics should be 
carcinoma. Large, lobulated, non-homogeneous masses (arrows) used if there is biliary obstruction. The advent of 
replace most of the left lobe of the liver. magnetic resonance imaging of the bile and pancreatic 



SECTION Three
271

Gastrointestinal system ﻿
ducts now means that essentially all ERCPs are to relieve obstruction, gallstones can be removed and 
therapeutic. wires can be passed into the duodenum to facilitate 

stenting at ERCP.
Percutaneous transhepatic 
cholangiography Pancreatic function tests
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography comple- Pancreatic function tests are now rarely used. In 
ments the use of ERCP in patients with jaundice due suspected pancreatic malabsorption, a therapeutic 
to obstruction of the main bile ducts, although is trial of pancreatic supplementation may be the easiest 
usually only possible if the intrahepatic bile ducts confirmatory test. If a definitive test is required, the 
are seen to be dilated on ultrasound. The site of the pancreolauryl test can be used, a test which relies on 
obstruction due to tumours of the head of the pancreas the urine collection of a substance which can be 
or benign and malignant bile duct strictures can be absorbed only after GI breakdown by pancreatic 
accurately localized and differentiated. This technique enzymes. In chronic pancreatitis, faecal elastase may 
is usually only used if ERCP fails. It also has a thera- be reduced. Measurement of the blood amylase or 
peutic function. Transhepatic drains can be placed lipase concentration is still valuable in the diagnosis 
to treat cholangitis and sepsis, stents can be placed of acute pancreatitis.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Locomotor system 15 
Stephen Kelly

Introduction non-specialist and specialist alike (Box 15.1). The 
routine requires some practise to become proficient, 

Musculoskeletal symptoms are a major cause of pain but once achieved, it has been shown to be highly 
and disability, accounting for a quarter of all GP sensitive in detecting significant abnormalities of the 
consultations in the UK, and have significant economic musculoskeletal system. It involves inspecting carefully 
consequences. Common musculoskeletal conditions for joint swelling and abnormal posture, as well as 
such as back pain and osteoarthritis are the dominant assessing the joints for normal movement. Typically, the 
causes of chronic pain, disability and work loss in clinician will then focus on particular areas of interest 
the UK and many other countries, consuming consider- with more dedicated and targeted examinations.
able health and social service resources. In addition, 
inflammatory arthritis and connective tissue disorders Screening history
may present with musculoskeletal symptoms. As such, 
it is critical that clinicians are able to appropriately If answers to the following four questions are negative, 
assess patients with such symptoms and initiate a musculoskeletal disorder is unlikely:
appropriate management or referral to a specialist 1	 Do you have any pain or stiffness in your 
centre. Early diagnosis and treatment of inflammatory muscles, joints or back?
arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis, has been consist- 2	 Have you ever had gout or arthritis?
ently shown to improve patients’ long-term outcome 3	 Can you dress yourself completely without 
with the early initiation of disease modifying therapy. difficulty?
The autoimmune rheumatic disorders, although much 4	 Can you walk up and down stairs without 
less common, cause significant morbidity with the difficulty?
potential for end-organ damage which may be fatal Positive answers imply the need for a more detailed 
if not recognized and treated early. assessment, as described in this chapter.

The objectives of performing a musculoskeletal 
assessment are:

•	 to make an accurate diagnosis Screening examination
•	 to assess the severity and consequences of the Gait

condition Watch the patient walking and turning back towards 
•	 to construct a clear management plan. you. Normal: symmetry, smooth movement, arm 

Taking an effective structured history and making swing, no pelvic tilt, normal stride length, ability to 
a simple, focused examination is likely to be more turn quickly.
important than imaging and serology, which on their With the patient standing in the anatomical position, 
own may be falsely reassuring. Although modern observe from behind, from the side, and from in 
musculoskeletal medicine uses complex imaging and front. Muscle symmetry should be noted along with 
immunological investigations, in most patients with limb alignment. Spine and limb alignment can be 
locomotor disorders, diagnosis can be achieved at the observed as well as abnormalities in the feet such as 
bedside without complex investigations. pes plans or pes cavus.

Common gait abnormalities are listed in Table 15.1.

General assessment: the ‘GALS’  Spine
locomotor screen Inspect the standing patient. Normal on inspection: no 

scoliosis, symmetrical paraspinals, normal shoulder and 
This brief screening examination, which should take gluteal muscle bulk and symmetry, level iliac crests, 
1-2 minutes, has been devised for use in routine clinical normal cervical and lumbar lordosis. Movement: finger 
assessment. This brief global assessment of the gait, to floor distance less than 15 cm, lumbar expansion 
arms, legs and spine (GALS) is typically used by both greater than 6 cm, ear touches acromion.



274 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Table 15.1  Gait abnormalities
Type Description Causes
Antalgic Avoiding weight bearing on affected side Pain related to arthritis or tendonitis
Spastic Leg swings outwardly from hip with extended knee Hemiplegia related to CVA
Shuffling Small shuffling steps, speeding up (festination), Parkinson’s disease

reduced arm swing and difficulty turning
Ataxic Wide based gait, swaying torso Cerebellar disease. Peripheral sensory ataxia 

(typically worsens with loss of visual input)
Waddling Exaggerated lateral movement of trunk and Bilateral gluteus medius tendinopathy
(Trendelenburg) circumduction of hip to compensate for weak abductors
High stepping Excessive hip and knee flexion to accommodate failure Peroneal neuropathy (multiple causes)
(foot drop) of ankle dorsiflexion

Box 15.1  GALS checklist

Gait
■	 Observe gait
■	 Observe patient in anatomical position
Arms
■	 Observe movement – hands behind head
■	 Observe backs of hands and wrists
■	 Observe palms
■	 Assess power grip and strength
■	 Assess fine precision pinch
■	 Squeeze MCPJs
Legs Figure 15.2  From the front, ask the patient to ‘place your ear on 
■	 Assess full flexion and extension your right then your left shoulder’. 
■	 Assess internal rotation of hips
■	 Perform patellar tap
■	 Inspect feet
■	 Squeeze MTPJs
Spine
■	 Inspect spine
■	 Assess lateral flexion of neck
■	 Assess lumbar spine movement

Figure 15.3  Gently press the mid-point of each supraspinatus to 
elicit the hyperalgesia of fibromyalgia. 

■	 From behind – look for abnormal spinal and 
paraspinal anatomy and look at the legs.

■	 From the side – look for abnormal spinal 
posture, then ask the patient to bend down and 
touch his toes (Fig. 15.1).

■	 From the front – ask the patient to ‘put your 
ear on your left then right shoulder’ and watch 
the neck movements (Fig. 15.2).

Figure 15.1  Inspect patient from behind and side, observing for ■	 Gently press the mid-point of each 
normal spinal curves, then ask the patient to ‘bend forwards to try supraspinatus muscle to elicit tenderness  
to touch your toes’. (Fig. 15.3).



SECTION Three
275

Locomotor system ﻿
Arms Table 15.2  Instructions for examining arms
Ask the patient to follow instructions as in Table 
15.2 (see Figs 15.4-15.9). Instruction Normal outcome

‘Raise arms out sideways 180° elevation through 
and up above your head’ abduction without wincing
‘Touch the middle of your Touches above T10 with 
back’ both hands
‘Straighten your elbows Elbows extend to 180° or 
right out’ slightly beyond (females) 

symmetrically
‘Place hands together as 90° wrist extension and 
if to pray, with elbows straight fingers
right out’
‘The same with hands 90° wrist flexion
back to back’

Figure 15.4  ‘Put your hands behind your head, elbows back.’ ‘Place both hands out in No wrist/finger swelling/
Observe for pain or restricted movement. front, palms down, fingers deformity, 90° pronation

out straight’
Metacarpophalangeal No tenderness
(MCP) cross-compression
‘Turn hands over’ 90° supination

No palmar swellings, 
wasting or erythema

‘Make a fist and hide your Can hide fingernails
nails’
‘Pinch index, middle finger Can do
and thumb together’
Also look for swelling Tenderness may be elicited
between the heads of the 
metacarpals and gently 
squeeze across the MCP 
joints to elicit tenderness

Figure 15.5  ‘Put your hands out, palms down, and then turn 
your hands over.’ 

Figure 15.7  ‘Place your hands together as if to 
pray, with elbows right out.’ 

Figure 15.9  Look for 
swelling between the heads of 

Figure 15.6  ‘Make a fist with the metacarpals and gently 
both hands.’ squeeze across the 

metacarpophalangeal joints 
to elicit tenderness. 

Figure 15.8  ‘Do the same with your hands back to 
back.’ 



276 15 Locomotor system ﻿
Legs the movements and asks the patient to follow them. 
With the patient still standing: The precise order of the examination is not important 
■	 Examine the lower limbs for swelling, and clinicians usually develop their own pattern of 

deformities or limb shortening. Normal: no knee examination.
deformity, anterior or popliteal swelling, no 
muscle wasting, no hindfoot swelling or Children
deformity. Children should have their height and weight 

■	 Then, with the patient lying on a couch, measured and plotted on centile charts to assess 
continue the examination following the growth. When examining children, the assessment 
instructions in Table 15.3 (see Figs 15.10-15.14).

This examination can be conducted in approxi-
mately 2 minutes, especially if the clinician performs 

Table 15.3  Instructions for examining legs
Instruction Normal outcome
Flex hip and knee, No bony crepitus, 140° knee 
holding knee flexion
Passively rotate hips 90° total pain-free rotation
Bulge test/patellar tap No detectable fluid
Palpate popliteal No swelling
fossa
Inspect feet No deformity, callosities or 

forefoot widening (daylight sign)
Test subtalar and Pain-free calcaneal mobility at 
ankle movement subtalar joint, dorsiflexion 

beyond plantigrade and 30° Figure 15.10  Gently flex the hips and knees, feeling for crepitus 
at the knee during movement, and look for pain and restriction of 

plantarflexion movement. Look for knee effusion. 

A Bulge test B Patellar tap

Figure 15.11  (A) Bulge test and (B) patellar tap. 



SECTION Three
277

Locomotor system ﻿

Figure 15.14  Squeeze across metacarpophalangeal (MTP) joints 
Figure 15.12  Palpate popliteal fossa. and inspect the soles of the feet. 

Figure 15.13  Test subtalar and ankle movement. 

of the musculoskeletal system should be done with Recording the results
a parent present and include all the components 
of the adult version with minor additions as The incorporation of a brief musculoskeletal examina-
follows: tion into the routine examination should lead to a 

more detailed assessment if any abnormalities are 
Gait found (Table 15.4).
Ask the child to walk on his tiptoes and then on 
the heels.

From the front, ask the child to put his hands Specific locomotor history
together (as if praying) and also put his hands back 
to back and then have him reach his arms up toward General demographic details such as age, sex and 
the sky. occupation should be recorded. Start the full 

Additionally, when assessing the spine, ask the child musculoskeletal history with the presenting complaint 
to open his mouth and insert three of his own fingers and ask the patient to describe the sequence of 
into it. symptoms, related features and events since the onset. 

Symmetry is key and any asymmetry should be Characteristic diagnostic points may emerge. Pain is 
assessed for pathology. It is normal for toddlers to be a common presenting complaint and as such the 
‘bow-legged’, ‘knock-kneed’ and ‘flat-footed’. Various clinician is expected to explore this fully. Using the 
foot and toe appearances are also normal, including WILDA (Words, Intensity, Location, Duration, 
in-toeing, out-toeing and ‘curly’ toes. These appear- Aggravating/alleviating factors) pain assessment 
ances usually resolve as the child grows. approach may be helpful in drawing out key aspects 



278 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Table 15.4  How to record the locomotor screen routinely in Box 15.2  Common patterns of joint pain radiation
the medical record Pain may be referred or radiate from an affected joint, e.g.:
Screening questions: pain 0 ■	 Neck pain may radiate through the occiput to the vertex 

gout or arthritis 0 or to the shoulder and down the arm, with paraesthesiae 
dressing ✓ if there is nerve-root impingement.
walking ✓ ■	 Shoulder joint pain may radiate to the elbow and below.

■
with positive answers being elaborated. 	 Thoracic spine nerve root pain may radiate around the 

chest and mimic cardiac pain.
Examination:

■	 Lumbar spinal root pain may radiate through the 
A (Appearance) M (Movement) buttock and leg to the knee and below, with 
G ✓ paraesthesiae in the foot with a large disc prolapse 
A ✓ ✓ – this is called ‘sciatica’.
L ✓ ✓ ■	 Hip-joint pain may radiate to the knee and below.
S ✓ ✓ ■	 Knee pain may radiate above and below the joint.
with abnormal findings indicated, e.g. in rheumatoid 
arthritis:
A (Appearance) M (Movement)
G ✗ Duration
A ✗ ✗ The temporal description of pain is important in 
L ✗ ✗ understanding the route cause. Pain may be constant, 
S ✓ ✓ episodic or a combination of both. Is the patient ever 
Slow painful gait. pain free? Can he clearly identify the time of onset 
Synovitis of MCP, MTP, wrists and knee joints. and is there a pattern periodicity? For example, an 

osteoporotic vertebral fracture may be acute and 
self-limiting which contrasts with the severe, constant 
and gnawing pain of a spinal metastatic deposit that 

of the patient’s history and clarify the nature of the prevents sleep.
complaint. (See also Chapter 11.) Aggravating/alleviating factors
Words Aggravating and alleviating factors are often very 
‘I have pain’ is not descriptive enough to inform a helpful when trying to make a diagnosis. Back pain 
clinician about the character of the pain symptoms. or stiffness which improves with exercise may point 
Patients may have more than one type of pain and to an inflammatory cause whereas pain which worsens 
should be encouraged to describe their pain as much after use is often describe in the setting of degenerative 
as possible. Neuropathic pain can be described as arthritis.
burning, shooting, tingling, radiating, lancinating or Back pain is the most common musculoskeletal 
numbness. Somatic pain may be described as dull or complaint and as such deserves further consideration. 
throbbing and can usually be well localized. Somatic When taking a history of a patient’s back symptoms 
pain is most commonly described in the context of it is important to identify potential ‘red flags’ which 
musculoskeletal pain afflicting joints and the spine. mandate further imaging or investigations to exclude 

Pain described as squeezing, pressure, cramping, a potentially sinister underlying diagnosis. If red flag 
distention, dull, deep, and stretching is visceral in signs are present, then referral to a specialist for 
origin. further evaluation is advised and a patient should be 

advised to rest and to avoid physical activity until 
Intensity then. Importantly, nerve root pain (unilateral sciatica) 

is not itself a cause for alarm, and conservative treat-
It may be useful to use a simple visual analogue scale ment should be effective. A list of red flag symptoms 
or ask the patient to rate his pain on a 0 to 10 scale. associated with back pain can be found in Table 15.5, 
This may allow for monitoring and assessing progres- with potential associated causes.
sion of the underlying disorder. Pain may be referred or radiate from an affected 
Location joint (Box 15.2). With these pain patterns in mind, 

the joints above and below the apparently affected 
An accurate location of pain is often very helpful area should be examined.
although it must be remembered that joint pain may 
radiate. Patients should be asked, ‘Where is your Chronic pain syndromes
pain?’ or ‘Do you have pain in more than one area?’

Pain may be referred or radiate from an affected Chronic pain syndromes need to be distinguished 
joint (Box 15.2). from other rheumatic disorders and a careful history 



SECTION Three
279

Locomotor system ﻿

Table 15.5  Red flag symptoms associated with back pain Non-inflammatory joint disease
with potential associated causes Pain of a non-inflammatory origin is more directly 
Red flag Potential cause related to function and use and usually improves 

with rest. This is in contrast to inflammatory joint 
Elderly (>65) or Elderly patient – osteoporosis pain which is often present at rest as well as on use 
young (<40) patient Young patient – and tends to vary from day to day and from week to 

inflammatory arthritis week. Stiffness, particularly in the morning or after 
Immunocompromised Infection a period of inactivity, is often reported in a patient’s 
Trauma Fracture or displacement history and typically lasts no more than 30 minutes. 
History of cancer Malignancy/metastasis However, in severe cases the duration may be much 
Nocturnal pain Malignancy longer. Subjective joint swelling may be described 
Systemically unwell and indeed patients with knee osteoarthritis may 

Infection
(temperature/weight present with a significant effusion. Joint swelling in 
loss/night sweats) this context tends to be more intermittent than the 

persistent joint swelling and warmth seen in inflam-
Thoracic pain Inflammatory – ankylosing matory conditions.

spondylitis Locking of a joint may occur. In the knee, this 
Infection/malignancy means that the knee becomes locked in such a way 
Aortic dissection/pancreatitis that it will not extend fully, although it may flex. In 

Saddle anaesthesia/ Cauda equina or cord other joints, locking is less well defined and simply 
bilateral sciatica/ compression means that at some point through its range of motion 
progressive the joint becomes stuck, usually associated with 
neurological deficit pain and often followed by swelling. Locking is due 
Bladder, bowel or Cauda equina or cord to material within the joint interfering with move
sexual dysfunction compression ment at the articular surfaces. In the knee, this is 

usually part of one of the menisci or a cartilaginous 
loose body.

is essential. A number of pain descriptors used by Inflammatory joint disease
patients can indicate the influence of non-organic Early morning stiffness
amplifying factors. For example, at least in the Early morning joint stiffness that persists for more 
English language, words like ‘searing’, ‘torturing’ than 30 minutes is an important symptom of active 
and ‘terrifying’ can be used by patients with chronic inflammatory joint disease. Ask about redness (rubor), 
widespread pain and fibromyalgia. Fibromyalgia warmth (calor), tenderness/pain (dolor) and swelling 
falls under the umbrella term central sensitization (tumour), the classic features of inflammation.
syndromes (CSS) and so may present with overlapping 
symptoms with other conditions such as irritable Distribution of joint disease
bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue and TMJ disorders. 
These debilitating disorders are often accompanied The pattern of joint involvement is important. Common 
by poor sleep patterns, severe fatigue and depressed patterns are monoarticular (single joint), pauciarticular 
mood. The difficulty of cultural, religious and lin- (up to four joints), polyarticular (many joints) and 
guistic influences in interpreting pain should not be axial (spinal involvement). The pattern of joint 
underestimated. involvement often aids in making a list of likely dif-

ferential diagnoses. For example, rheumatoid arthritis 
Joint disease is typically a symmetrical inflammatory arthritis of 

the small and large joints often presenting with 
A combination of pain and stiffness, leading to loss metacarpal-phalangeal, wrist and metatarsal-phalangeal 
of function, is a classic feature of joint disease. Usually joint involvement. There are only a few causes of an 
one component predominates, as with stiffness in exactly symmetrical arthropathy (Box 15.3). An 
inflammation and pain in mechanical joint problems. asymmetrical inflammatory arthritis presentation is 
Therefore, specific questions will establish whether often seen in spondyloarthropathies such as reactive 
symptoms are non-inflammatory (e.g. osteoarthritis) arthritis. An inflammatory monoarthritis presentation 
or inflammatory (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis). As with must elicit a suspicion of infection alongside other 
any condition, the good clinician will also draw out potential conditions such as gout or psoriatic arthritis. 
the consequences of the disorder in terms of the A history of fever or sweating may be helpful and 
impact on the patient’s day-to-day function and if possible, synovial fluid should be aspirated from 
quality of life. The effect on relationships, work and the joint to look for infection. Other conditions have 
social activities will help the clinician to gauge the such a classic history that it is diagnostic. For example, 
severity of the problem and possibly elicit issues of acute inflammation in the first metatarsophalangeal 
stress and psychosocial pressure. joint (hallux) suggests a diagnosis of gout (Box 15.4). 



280 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.3  Importance of distribution of joint involvement Box 15.5  Polymyalgia rheumatica
in differential diagnosis of pauciarthritis or 
polyarthritis A 74-year-old woman presented with a 2-month history of 

pain around her hips and shoulders. The key points in the 
Typically symmetrical history were that these regions were extremely stiff for 4 
■	 Upper and lower limbs: rheumatoid arthritis, systemic hours each morning and inability to turn over in bed, and 

lupus erythematosus that there was no joint swelling. Clinically there was pain 
■	 Especially upper limbs: haemochromatosis (hand: index, and some limitation of movement at the shoulders and hips 

middle metacarpophalangeal joints) but no synovitis. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 
Typically asymmetrical 96 mm/1st hour, and she had a dramatic response within 2 

days to a moderate dose of prednisolone.
■	 Psoriatic arthritis
Typically lower limb and asymmetrical
■	 Spondyloarthritis (e.g. ankylosing spondylitis, reactive 

arthritis)
■	 Document any associated features Box 15.6  Historical pointers to the differential diagnosis 

of monoarticular inflammatory joint disease
First attack

Box 15.4  Acute gout ■	 Exclude infection by aspiration for culture and crystals
■	 If negative culture but high-risk group, biopsy, e.g. 

A 48-year-old publican presented with sudden severe pain tuberculosis in Asian immigrants or immunosuppressed 
and swelling of his left big toe. He was unable to bear patients
weight or wear a shoe and said that he could not even bear 
the weight of his bedclothes on the toe at night. His past Recurrent attacks
history included hypertension, for which he was taking a ■	 Flitting (gonococcal arthritis, rheumatic fever)
thiazide diuretic, and his alcohol intake was excessive. On ■	 Episodic (crystal arthritis, palindromic rheumatism)
examination, he had tophi on the ears (Fig. 15.15) and the Persistent synovitis with none of the above features
left first metatarsophalangeal joint was red, hot, swollen 

■	 Look for systemic features and check serology (e.g. 
and exquisitely painful to touch. Aspiration of the joint rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibody)
revealed urate crystals.

duration of the episodes and any associated clinical 
symptoms.

Episodic joint pain
Ask if attacks of joint pain are acute and associated 
with redness around the joint, with the attacks lasting 
about 48 hours (occasionally up to 1 week) and 
migrating to other joints. This is typical of palindromic 
rheumatism, which may progress to rheumatoid 
arthritis. Recurrent painful swelling of the same joint 
may be indicative of a crystal arthropathy such as 
gout or calcium pyrophosphate disease.

Figure 15.15  Gouty tophus on the ear. Other sites include the Flitting or migratory joint pains
elbows, fingers and toes. The term ‘flitting’ or migratory joint pains is used to 

describe inflammation beginning in one joint and 
then involving others, usually one at a time for about 

The pain and stiffness of the shoulder and hip girdles 3 days each. Gonococcal arthritis should be considered; 
in polymyalgia rheumatica is also typical (Box 15.5). this is characterized by typical fleeting skin lesions 
The pattern of the spondyloarthropathies can also be and urethritis, in addition to joint pain. In rheumatic 
diagnostic with inflammatory sacroiliac and spinal pain fever, there is associated cardiac involvement, and 
and stiffness, lower limb arthritis, Achilles tendinitis erythema marginatum and subcutaneous nodules 
and plantar fasciitis. may occur.

The other features in the history that should be 
Recurrent attacks of joint pain brought out are best considered under the differential 
Ask if the same joint is always involved. If not, diagnosis of polyarthritis (Box 15.6). Many arthropa-
define the patterns of involvement, the severity and thies may have a monoarticular presentation.



SECTION Three
281

Locomotor system ﻿

Figure 15.17  Schirmer’s test – a sterile strip of filter paper is 
hooked over the lower eyelid. Less than 5 mm of wetness after  
5 minutes is abnormal and is associated with autoimmune 
rheumatic disease. 

or miscarriages, especially in the context of livedo 
reticularis, should raise the suspicion of the antiphos-
pholipid syndrome.

Soft tissue symptoms
Soft tissue problems are common and usually consist 
of pain, a dull ache, tenderness or swelling. In the 
elderly these symptoms often appear spontaneously, 
but in younger people there is usually a history of 

Figure 15.16  Extensive rash in sun-exposed areas in a woman 
with systemic lupus erythematosus and anti-Ro antibodies. injury or overuse, through either occupation (e.g. 

tenosynovitis of the long flexor tendons of the hand) 
or sport (e.g. Achilles tendinitis in runners, shoulder 
rotator cuff tendinopathy in swimmers or throwers). 
It is important to define the exact site of the symptoms 

Inflammatory connective tissue diseases and the factors that either make them worse or induce 
relief. The mechanism of injury is also important and 

The autoimmune rheumatic disorders, such as systemic can help guide a focused examination. The localization 
lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjögren’s syndrome, of symptoms to specific soft tissue structures can be 
inflammatory myopathies, systemic sclerosis and the confirmed by careful examination (Box 15.7). The 
vasculitides, are multisystem disorders. It is critical possible structures involved are joint, tendon, ligament, 
that a full systems enquiry and physical examination bursa and muscle. Local palpation may be enough 
are performed when inflammatory connective tissue to accurately locate bursitis or enthesitis (inflammation 
is suspected. Associated features of these conditions at the attachment of a ligament or tendon to bone). 
include systemic symptoms such as weight loss, malaise Movement of the joint region often elicits pain or 
or fevers, and rash, especially if the latter is photosensi- discomfort in a particular direction which can direct 
tive or vasculitic (Fig. 15.16). Alopecia, oral and the clinician to the affected structure. Subacromial 
genital ulceration, Raynaud’s phenomenon and bursitis typically produces pain when the shoulder 
symptoms of neurological, cardiac, pulmonary and is abducted to 80° and resolves at 130-140°, described 
gastrointestinal involvement may occur. Dry eyes as a painful arc, whereas anterior and posterior move-
and dry mouth (sicca symptoms) are common and ments are maintained.
can be documented with Schirmer’s test (Fig. 15.17). 
Renal disease is a serious complication of the auto-
immune rheumatic disorders, especially in SLE and The bones
the systemic vasculitides. Clinical assessment should Bone pain is characteristically deep seated and local-
always include measuring blood pressure and dip- ized, but referred pain may confuse the clinical picture. 
testing the urine for blood and protein and microscopy In the case of fractures, unless pathological, there 
of the urine sediment for casts or dysmorphic red will almost always be a history of injury. In athletes, 
cells if this is positive. Ear, nose and throat involvement however, a fracture may be due to chronic overuse, 
with sinusitis, facial pain and deafness is common in as in stress fractures of the tibia or metatarsals in 
Wegener’s granulomatosis and Churg–Strauss syn- runners. The spontaneous onset of pain may suggest 
drome. A history of arterial and venous thromboses Paget’s disease (with bony enlargement, e.g. skull or 



282 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.7  Localization of the site of articular and 
extra-articular features

Joint
■	 Diffuse pain and tenderness
■	 Generalized joint swelling
■	 Restriction of movement, usually in all directions of 

movement (specific to each joint)
Tendon
■	 Localized pain/tenderness at attachment (enthesis) or in 

the tendon substance
■	 Swelling, tendon sheath or paratendon
■	 Pain on resisted movement
■	 Sometimes pain on stretch (e.g. Achilles)

Figure 15.18  Thenar wasting due to carpal tunnel syndrome. 
Ligament This is often associated with osteoarthritis. Note nodal change on 
■	 Localized pain/tenderness at attachment or in ligament the terminal interphalangeal joints of the index fingers. 

substance
■	 Pain on stretch
■	 Instability, if major tear that can be pursued in history taking. Observation 
Bursa of any difficulty in undressing and getting onto the 
■	 Localized tenderness examination couch will further help in assessment. 
■	 Pain on stretching adjacent structures The patient must always be asked to stand and walk, 
Muscle even when it is obvious that this may be difficult. 

Note how much help the patient requires from others 
■	 Localized or diffuse pain and tenderness or from sticks, crutches, etc. The musculoskeletal 
■	 Pain on resisted action system includes the muscles, bones, joints and soft-
■	 Pain on stretch (e.g. hamstring) tissue structures such as tendons and ligaments. 

Remember that although muscle-wasting may be due 
to primary muscle disease (e.g. polymyositis), it is 
more commonly secondary to disuse, perhaps because 

Box 15.8  Examination of the musculoskeletal system of a painful joint, or to neuropathy due to nerve root 
General observations compression or peripheral neuropathy (Fig. 15.18). 
■	 Gait Examination of the muscles is discussed further in 
■	 Posture Chapter 16.
■	 Mobility
■	 Deformity The bones
■	 Independence: use of wheelchair or walking aids The examination of the bones should always be 
■	 Muscle wasting directed by information obtained from the history.
■	 Long bones
Fractures Inspection

Look for any alterations in shape or outline and 
■	 Joints
■	 Tendons measure any shortening. In Paget’s disease (osteitis 
■	 Skin deformans), bowing of the long bones, particularly 

the tibia (Fig. 15.19) and femur, is associated with 
bony enlargement and, usually, increased local tem-
perature. The skull is also commonly involved, but 

tibia) or metastatic deposits. Infection must also this may not be apparent until the disease is advanced. 
be considered, particularly in younger patients or in Early involvement of the skull bones can be detected 
immunodeficiency states. Consider also congenital on X-rays (Fig. 15.20). Alterations in the shape of 
or familial disorders as predisposing factors, for bones also occur in rickets as a result of epiphyseal 
example multiple osteochondromata or brittle bone enlargement. Deformity of the chest in rickets is due 
disease (osteogenesis imperfecta). to osteochondral enlargement (rickety rosary).

Localized swellings of long bones may be caused 
by infections, cysts or tumours. Spontaneous fractures 

Examination: general principles may occasionally be the presenting symptom in the 
diagnosis of secondary carcinoma, multiple myeloma, 

Observe the patient entering the room (Box 15.8). generalized osteitis fibrosa cystica (hyperparathy-
Abnormalities of gait and posture may provide clues roidism) or osteogenesis imperfecta.



SECTION Three
283

Locomotor system ﻿

Palpation Fractures
On palpation, bone tenderness occurs in local lesions Fractures are common and may involve any bone. 
when there is destruction, elevation or irritation of They are painful, distressing for the patient and 
the periosteum, as in generalized osteitis fibrosa expensive for the community (Box 15.9). Fractures 
cystica, myelomatosis, bone infections, occasionally in healthy bones commonly involve the long bones 
in carcinomatosis of bones and, rarely, in leukaemia. and are usually due to trauma. Fractures of the wrists, 
Injury is the commonest cause. hips and vertebrae are more frequently complications 

A B

Figure 15.19  Paget’s disease of the right tibia. Note tibial bowing and bony enlargement (A) and bony enlargement sclerosis with some 
patchy porosis in the X-ray of the upper tibia (B). 

A B

Figure 15.20  Paget’s disease, causing deformity of the skull (A). Note the thickened skull vault with remodelled bone (B). 



284 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.9  Fractures: clinical features separation of the bones at the fracture site and other 
features are disguised by the thick overlying muscle. 

Type A fractured neck of the femur causes deformity 
■	 Closed through external rotation of the foot and shortening 
■	 Compound (open) of the leg.
Complications Most fractures are characterized by local tenderness 
■	 Accompanying soft-tissue injury (indirect) and swelling, unless the overlying muscle mass is 

large such as at the hip. Bony crepitus, due to abnormal 
Features motion at the fracture site, is a feature of fractures, 
■	 Haemorrhage but this should not be elicited unless absolutely 
■	 Deformity necessary for diagnosis because it is very painful. 
■	 Pain However, if it is perceived or has been recognized 
■	 Crepitus by the patient, it is diagnostic.
■	 Restricted movement A fracture of the bone may damage the neighbour-
Cause ing soft tissues directly or, alternatively, a fracture 

may be a marker of severe injury in which direct 
■	 Traumatic damage to the soft tissues such as the nerves and 
■	 Spontaneous (osteoporosis or metabolic) vessels may have taken place. A neuromuscular 
■	 Pathological assessment distal to the fracture site is imperative. 

The presence or absence of pulses and cutaneous 
sensation and the colour and perfusion of the limb 

of bone disease, such as osteoporosis. Multiple rib must always be recorded and any changes over time 
fractures, caused by falls, may be found in heavy reported. Limb ischaemia distal to a fracture is a 
alcohol users but may only be seen as healed lesions surgical emergency. Voluntary movement at joints 
on chest X-ray. Fractures occur without apparent distal to a fractured long bone, such as ankle move-
trauma when a bone is weakened by disease, especially ment in a fractured femur, should be noted. If this 
with metastatic malignant deposits in bone (pathologi- is absent, nerve injury must be suspected.
cal fractures). Traumatic fractures invariably present 
with local pain, swelling and loss of function, but 
pathological fractures may be relatively silent. The The joints
history will reveal the circumstances of the trauma, Examination of the joints can be summarized simply 
whether accidental or due to physical abuse, and as ‘look, feel and move’ (i.e. inspection, palpation 
should be carefully documented, if necessary, with and range of movement). With practice, the clinician 
diagrams or digital photographs of the clinical findings. can develop a systematic review of the joints – for 
If clinical photographs are taken, prior written consent example the jaw, cervical spine, shoulder girdle and 
is needed. upper limb, thoracic and lumbar spine, pelvis and 

lower limb – so that inconspicuous but important 
Examination of suspected fracture joints, such as the temporomandibular, sternoclavicular 
Fractures may be open (compound) or closed. In and sacroiliac joints, will not be overlooked. Compare 
closed fractures, the surrounding soft tissues are intact. the corresponding joints on the two sides of the 
In open fractures, the bone communicates with the body and always take care to avoid causing undue 
surface of the skin, either because the primary injury discomfort.
has broken the overlying skin or because deformation 
at the fracture site has caused the bone ends to Inspection
penetrate the skin. There is a major risk of infection The detection of joint inflammation is a crucial clinical 
when the fracture site communicates with the skill. Inflammation is often associated with redness 
open air. of the joint and with tenderness and warmth. Look 

Deformity is an obvious feature in the majority of also for swelling or deformity of the joint. The overall 
fractures although in some patients this may be pattern of joint involvement should be recorded. 
difficult to appreciate due to a large body habitus. Examine the contralateral joint where possible and 
Comparison with the contralateral limb is often note whether the distribution is symmetrical, as is 
helpful. Deformity may be clinically characteristic, usual in rheumatoid arthritis (Fig. 15.21), or asym-
as in Colles’ fracture, in which there is a fracture of metrical, as in psoriatic arthropathy or gout (Fig. 
the distal end of the radius characterized by dorsal 15.22). The seronegative spondyloarthropathies (Fig. 
displacement and angulation, shortening of the wrist 15.23) tend to involve predominantly the joints of 
and rotation of the fragment, well summarized in the lower limb.
the description ‘dinner-fork deformity’. Certain 
fractures may show little deformity; for example, a Palpation
fracture of the femoral shaft may be accompanied On palpation of a joint, check first for tenderness. 
by only slight deformity, as there is often little Then determine whether the swelling is due to bony 



SECTION Three
285

Locomotor system ﻿

Figure 15.21  Symmetrical joint involvement due to rheumatoid 
arthritis. Figure 15.24  Nodal osteoarthritis (Heberden’s nodes). 

Box 15.10  Assessment of joint tenderness
■	 Grade 1: The patient says the joint is tender
■	 Grade 2: The patient winces
■	 Grade 3: The patient winces and withdraws the affected 

part
■	 Grade 4: The patient will not allow the joint to be 

touched

Tenderness and enlargement of the ends of long 
bones, particularly the radius, ulna and tibia, can 

Figure 15.22  Gouty tophus of the index finger. occur in hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy: 
a chest X-ray is essential. Gross disorganization of a 
joint – nearly always the foot and ankle joints – associ-
ated with an absence of deep pain and position sense 
occurs in neuropathic (Charcot) joints. Charcot joints 
probably arise from recurrent painless injury and 
overstretching and are a feature of severe chronic 
sensorimotor neuropathy.

Joint tenderness may be graded depending on the 
patient’s reaction to firm pressure of the joint between 
finger and thumb (Box 15.10). Grade 4 tenderness 
occurs only in septic arthritis, crystal arthritis and 
rheumatic fever.

If tenderness is present, localize it as accurately as 
possible and determine whether it arises in the joint 
or in neighbouring structures, for example in the 

Figure 15.23  Acute synovitis of the interphalangeal joint in supraspinatus or bicipital tendon rather than the 
reactive arthritis of the left hallux. Differential diagnosis includes shoulder joint. Other rheumatic conditions produce 
gout. different types of pain. For example, in conditions 

such as complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) 
type I (previously known as reflex sympathetic 

enlargement or osteophytes (e.g. Heberden’s nodes, dystrophy), hyperalgesia (abnormal and excessive 
Fig. 15.24), thickening of synovial tissues, such as pain to mildly painful stimuli) and allodynia (a sensa-
occurs in inflammatory arthritis, or effusion into the tion of pain to stimuli not normally painful, e.g. light 
joint space. Joint effusions usually have a characteristi- touch) may often be seen, together with altered 
cally smooth outline and fluctuation is usually easily sweating and discoloration. In fibromyalgia, there is 
demonstrable. Palpation of the whole joint is important widespread diffuse muscle and joint tenderness but 
as this may reveal localized enthesitis (lateral epi- no inflammation. A number of characteristic trigger 
condylitis at the elbow) or reveal localized effusions points may be tender around the neck, trunk, and 
(Baker’s cyst in the posterior aspect of the knee joint). upper and lower limbs.



286 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Tendon sheath crepitus Box 15.11  Extra-articular features of joint disease
Tendon sheath crepitus is a grating or creaking sensa-

■
tion defined by palpating the tendon while the patient 	 Cutaneous nodules

■
is asked to contract the muscle tendon complex 	 Cutaneous vasculitic lesions

■
involved. It is particularly common in the hand and 	 Lymphadenopathy

■
is seen in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic sclerosis. 	 Oedema

■
In tenosynovitis of the long flexor tendons in the 	 Tendon sheath effusions

■
palm, tendon sheath crepitus may be associated with 	 Enlarged bursae

■
the trigger phenomenon, in which the finger becomes 	 Ocular inflammation

■
caught in flexion and has to be pulled back into 	 Diarrhoea

■
extension. Tendon sheath effusions can be distin- 	 Urethritis

■
guished from joint swelling by their anatomical 	 Orogenital ulceration

■
location in association with tendons but where there 	 Alopecia
is doubt an ultrasonographic assessment will provide 
clarity.

Joint crepitus Box 15.12  Types of subcutaneous nodules

Joint crepitus can be detected by feeling the joint ■	 Gouty tophi caused by urate deposition
with one hand while moving it passively with the ■	 Rheumatoid nodules
other. This may indicate osteoarthritis or loose bodies ■	 Vasculitic nodules in SLE and systemic vasculitis
(cartilaginous fragments) in the joint space but should ■	 Xanthomatous deposits (hypercholesterolaemia)
be differentiated from non-specific clicking of joints.

Range of movement
When examining joints for range of movement, it is 
usually sufficient to estimate the degree of limitation 
based on comparison with the normal side or on the 
examiner’s previous experience. For accurate descrip-
tion, the actual range of movement should be 
measured with a protractor (goniometer). Both active 
and passive movement should be assessed. Active 
movement, however, may give a poor estimation of 
true range of movement because of muscle spasm 
due to pain. If pain is very severe on attempting 
active movement and other findings suggest a fracture, 
take an X-ray before attempting any further examina-
tion. In testing the range of passive movement, always 
be gentle, particularly when the joints are painful. 
The direction of joint movement, particularly in ball 
and socket joints, may provide additional information 
as to the underlying lesion.

Limitation of movement in a joint may be due to 
pain, muscle spasm, contracture, inflammation, Figure 15.25  Rheumatoid nodule overlying the olecranon of the 
increased thickness of the capsular or periarticular right arm. 
structures, effusion into the joint space, bony over-
growths, bony ankylosis, mechanical factors such as 
a torn meniscus or to painful conditions quite uncon- overlying joints or in the finger pads (see Figs 15.15 
nected with the joint. and 15.22). Subcutaneous nodules in rheumatoid 

arthritis are firm and non-tender; they may be detected 
Extra-articular features of joint disease by running the examining thumb from the point of 

the elbow down the proximal portion of the ulna 
Some of the extra-articular features of joint disease (Fig. 15.25). They can also be found at other pressure 
are listed in Box 15.11. and frictional sites, such as bony prominences, includ-

ing the sacrum and in the hands. If an olecranon 
Subcutaneous nodules bursa swelling is found, feel also in its wall, as 
Subcutaneous nodules are associated with several rheumatoid nodules, tophi or occasionally xanthomata 
conditions (Box 15.12). If gout is suspected, inspect may be found within the swelling. Subcutaneous 
the helix of the ear for tophi caused by the subcutane- nodules are not specific to rheumatoid arthritis and 
ous deposition of urate, which may also be found may occur in patients with SLE, systemic sclerosis 



SECTION Three
287

Locomotor system ﻿
excluded. Pitting leg oedema may indicate cardiac 
failure, pericardial effusion or nephrotic syndrome, 
which can complicate rheumatoid arthritis and SLE.

Other soft-tissue swellings
Tendon sheath effusions are distinguished from joint 
swellings by their location in association with tendons. 
Enlarged subcutaneous bursae may be found over 
pressure areas, particularly at the olecranon surface 
of the elbow, owing to inflammatory joint disease or 
secondary to friction. Deeper bursae may be defined 
only by finding local tenderness or by stressing adjacent 

Figure 15.26  Nail-fold vasculitis in rheumatoid arthritis. This tissues (e.g. greater trochanter bursitis).
also occurs in SLE and other systemic vasculitides. 

Examination of individual joints
The range of movement of joints is described in the 
following pages. All motion should be measured in 
degrees from a neutral or zero position, which must 
be defined whenever possible and compared with 
the opposite side. Some special features seen at 
individual joints are set out in each section.

The spine
General examination of the vertebral column
Inspection
Examine the patient both in standing and in sitting 

Figure 15.27  Pitting oedema, right hand. in the erect posture. The normal thoracolumbar spine 
has an S-shaped curve. If there is an abnormality, 
note which vertebrae are involved and at what level 
any vertebral projection is most prominent. Note 

and rheumatic fever. Ultrasonographic appearance the presence of any local projections or angular 
may be helpful in distinguishing subcutaneous nodules deformity of the spine. Torticollis, if present, is 
and may facilitate a guide aspiration if necessary. usually obvious, resulting form muscle spasm of the 
Cutaneous vasculitic lesions sternocleidomastoid, trapezius and other neck muscles. 

This places the neck in a tilted, rotated, partially flexed 
Cutaneous vasculitic lesions may be seen in rheuma- position.
toid arthritis, SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome and the systemic 
vasculitides. They may be small, punched-out necrotic Palpation
lesions, palpable purpura or vasculitic ulcers, especially The major landmarks are the spinous processes of 
on the lower limbs. Small vessel involvement is C7 (the vertebra prominens) and the last rib, which 
typically seen at the nail fold (cutaneous infarct; Fig. articulates with the 12th thoracic vertebra. In many 
15.26) but also occurs at pressure sites. Splinter patients, however, the last rib cannot be felt distinctly, 
haemorrhages, the classic feature of bacterial endo- and this is therefore rather untrustworthy as a guide 
carditis, may also be a feature of vasculitis and the to this level.
antiphospholipid syndrome. The neutral position of the spine is an upright 

stance with head erect and chin drawn in. Note any 
Lymphadenopathy curvature of the spinal column, whether as a whole 
Lymphadenopathy may be found proximal to an or of part of it. Abnormal curvature may be in an 
inflamed joint, not only in septic arthritis but also anterior, posterior or lateral direction (Fig. 15.28). 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Generalized lymphadeno Anterior curvature (convex forward) is termed lordosis. 
pathy, sometimes with splenomegaly, is common in There are natural lordotic curves in the cervical and 
active SLE. lumbar regions. Posterior curvature (convex backward) 

is termed kyphosis. The thoracic spine usually exhibits 
Local oedema a slight smooth kyphosis, which increases in the 
Local oedema is sometimes seen over inflamed joints elderly and especially in osteoporosis. It must be 
(Fig. 15.27), but other causes of oedema must be distinguished from a localized angular deformity 



288 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Figure 15.30  X-ray of tuberculous discitis. This shows the 
underlying deformity shown in Fig. 15.29. There is tuberculous 
infection of the intervertebral disc, causing the spinal deformity. 

Figure 15.28  Scoliosis of the lumbar spine due to prolapsed 
intervertebral disc. such a way that the posterior spinous processes come 

to point towards the concavity of the curve. The 
curvature is always greater than appears from inspec-
tion of the posterior spinous processes. In scoliosis 
due to muscle spasm (e.g. with lumbosacral disc 
protrusion syndromes), the spinal curvature and 
rotational deformity decrease in flexion. When scoliosis 
is caused by inequality of leg length, it disappears on 
sitting, because the buttocks then become level. 
Scoliosis secondary to skeletal anomalies shows in 
spinal flexion as a ‘rib hump’ due to the rotation. 
Kyphosis and scoliosis are often combined, particularly 
when the cause is an idiopathic spinal curvature, 
beginning in adolescence.

The cervical spine
The following movements should be tested (Fig. 
15.31):
■	 Rotation (ask the patient to look over one then 

Figure 15.29  Gibbus of the lumbar spine due to tuberculosis. the other shoulder).
■	 Flexion (ask the patient to touch chin to chest).
■	 Extension (ask the patient to look up to the 

(gibbus, Fig. 15.29) caused by a fracture, by Pott’s ceiling).
disease (spinal tuberculosis, Fig. 15.30) or by a meta- ■	 Lateral bending (ask the patient to bend the 
static malignant deposit. neck sideways and to try to touch the shoulder 

Lateral curvature is termed scoliosis (see Fig. 15.28) with the ear without raising the shoulder).
and may be towards either side. It is always accom- Note any pain or paraesthesiae in the arm repro-
panied by rotation of the bodies of the vertebrae in duced by neck movement, especially on gentle 



SECTION Three
289

Locomotor system ﻿
Left           Right

Neutral Rotation

  Extension          Flexion
Right   Left

Flexion and extension Lateral bending

Figure 15.31  Movements of the neck. 

Figure 15.32  Lateral X-ray of cervical spine showing 
sustained extension or lateral flexion, suggesting degenerative spondylosis with narrowing of the disc spaces and 
nerve-root involvement. If indicated, check for any reversed cervical lordosis between C4 and C6. 
associated neurological deficit, particularly of radicular 
or spinal cord type.

In rheumatoid arthritis, particular care is necessary 
when examining the neck, as atlantoaxial instability 
may lead to damage to the spinal cord when the 
neck is flexed. If there is any doubt about neck stability 
in a patient with rheumatoid arthritis, arrange for 
lateral X-rays of the cervical spine in flexion and 
extension, together with a view of the odontoid peg 
through the mouth, and defer clinical examination.

In patients with cervical injury, never try to elicit 
range of motion of the neck. Instead, splint the neck, 
take a history, look for abnormality of posture (usually 
in rotation) and check neurological function in the 
limbs, including both arms and both legs. Imaging Flexion Extension
the neck in the lateral (Fig. 15.32) and anteroposterior 
planes, without moving the neck, is essential and may 
be done with plain radiography or, in trauma patients, 
with computed tomography or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) to assess injury to the cord. Only 
if imaging is normal should neck movements be 
examined.

The thoracic and lumbar spine
The main movement at the thoracic spine is rotation, 
whereas the lumbar spine can flex, extend and bend Left Right
laterally. The following movements should be tested Rotation
(Fig. 15.33):
■	 Flexion (ask the patient to try to touch his toes, 

without bending at the knees). Lateral bending
■	 Extension (ask the patient to bend backwards). Figure 15.33  Movements of the lumbar and dorsal spine. 



290 15 Locomotor system ﻿
■	 Lateral bending (ask the patient to run the hand stages of this condition lateral flexion of the lumbar 

down the side of the thigh as far as possible. spine is typically affected first. In mechanical or 
■	 Thoracic rotation (ask the seated patient, with osteoarthritic back problems, flexion and extension 

arms crossed, to twist round to the left and are reduced more than lateral movements. In prolapsed 
right as far as possible). intervertebral disc lesions, sustained gentle lumbar 

In flexion, the normal lumbar lordosis should be extension may reproduce the low back pain and 
abolished. It is important to distinguish between sciatic radiation.
flexion at the lumbar spine and compensated flexion Chest expansion is a measure of costovertebral 
at the hips which may deceive the examiner if only movement and should be recorded using a tape 
a cursory examination is carried out. A more objective measure with the patient’s hands behind his head to 
assessment of lumbar spine flexion can be performed reduce the possibility of muscular action in the 
by marking a vertical 10-cm line on the skin overlying shoulder girdle giving a false reading. The examiner 
the lumbar spinous processes and the sacral dimples stands behind the patient and the tape measure is 
and measuring the increase in the line length on placed around the chest at the level of the xiphisternal 
flexion (modified Schober’s test); this should normally joint. The patient is asked to exhale and the tape is 
be 5 cm or more. Painful restriction of spinal move- tightened before a maximum inhalation. An increase 
ment is an important sign of cervical and lumbar of 5 cm is expected in adults. Reduced chest expansion 
spondylosis but may also be found in vertebral disc is a characteristic early feature in ankylosing spon-
disease or other mechanical disorders of the back or dylitis. Obviously, this may also be a feature of primary 
neck in association with muscle spasm. A useful pulmonary disease, such as emphysema.
clinical aphorism is that a rigid lumbar spine should Examination of the back is completed by assessing 
always be investigated for serious pathology, such as straight leg raising (SLR) and strength, sensation and 
infection (e.g. staphylococcal or tuberculous discitis), reflex activity in the legs. Pain and limitation on SLR 
malignancy or inflammation (e.g. ankylosing spondy- is a feature of a prolapsed intervertebral disc when 
litis). Spinal movements may be virtually absent in there is irritation or compression of one of the roots 
ankylosing spondylitis (Fig. 15.34), but in the early of the sciatic nerve. Tight hamstring muscles may 

cause a similar picture, but if there is severe pain, it 
is more considerate to lower the leg to just below 
the limit of SLR and then to see whether gentle 
passive dorsiflexion of the foot brings back the same 
pain. If in doubt, dorsiflex the foot once the limit of 
SLR has been reached. This further stretches the 
sciatic nerve (the pain increases) but does not affect 
the hamstrings (Lasègue’s sign). The femoral stretch 
test is a useful confirmatory test and is performed 
with the patient lying prone: if there is a prolapsed 
disc at that level, flexion at the knee will produce 
pain in the lower lumbar spine. Sacral sensory loss 
must always be carefully assessed because, if there is 
a large central lumbosacral disc protrusion, bilateral 
limitation of SLR may be associated with bladder or 
bowel dysfunction and sacral anaesthesia. This 
combination is an emergency and requires immediate 
investigation and treatment.

The sacroiliac joints
The surface markings of these joints are two dimples 
low in the lumbar region. Test for irritability in the 
following ways:
■	 Direct pressure over each sacroiliac joint.
■	 Firm pressure with the side of the hand over 

the sacrum.
■	 Inward pressure over both iliac bones with the 

patient lying on one side, in an attempt to 
distort the pelvis.

■	 Flex the hip to 90° and exert firm pressure at 
Figure 15.34  Ankylosing spondylitis. Note dorsal kyphosis and the knee through the femoral shaft (this should 
protuberant abdomen due to poor chest expansion with abdominal only be done if the hip and knee are not 
breathing. painful).



SECTION Three
291

Locomotor system ﻿
In the last three, a positive test is only indicated by examiner anchors the inferior angle of the scapula 

the patient localizing discomfort to the sacroiliac joint. between finger and thumb on the posterior chest 
wall. The following movements should be tested 

The shoulder (Fig. 15.35):
■	 Flexion

Shoulder examination involves the assessment of ■	 Extension
a number of other joints in addition to the gleno- ■	 Abduction
humeral articulation. Abduction of the shoulder ■	 Rotation in abduction
in particular involves movement at the sternoclavicular, ■	 Rotation in neutral position
acromioclavicular, glenohumeral and scapulotho- ■	 Elevation (also involving scapular movement)
racic joints. Pain is also referred and the shoulder In practice, internal rotation can best be compared 
examination should be accompanied by an examina- by recording the height reached by each thumb up 
tion of the cervical spine as radicular pain may the back, representing combined glenohumeral and 
be localized by the patient at the shoulder and scapular movement. Similarly, external rotation can 
vice versa. be assessed by the ability to get the hand to the back 

Inspection of the shoulder should be from the of the neck. Limitation of external rotation is a good 
posterior, lateral and anterior positions. Where possible sign of true glenohumeral disease, which may occur 
the contralateral shoulder should be exposed and in adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder) or erosive 
comparisons made in muscle bulk. damage from inflammatory arthritis.

Palpation of the shoulder should include the Note any pain during the range of movement. 
long head of biceps tendon in the bicipital groove, In supraspinatus tendinitis, a full passive range of 
acromio-clavicular joint, clavicle, sternoclavicular joint movement is found but there is a painful arc on 
and the acromion. abduction, with pain exacerbated on resisted abduc-

The neutral position is with the arm to the side, tion (see Fig. 15.35). Other tendon involvement 
elbow flexed to 90° and forearm pointing forwards. should also be defined by pain on resisted action.
Because the scapula is mobile, true shoulder (gleno- Subacromial impingement due to a bursitis or 
humeral) movement can be assessed only when the rotator cuff abnormality may produce severe pain at 

Neutral (adduction) Rotation in neutral adduction

Extension             Flexion

Painful arc

Flexion and extension Abduction

External

B

Internal

A Rotation in abduction Elevation

Figure 15.35  (A) Movements of the shoulder. (B) Painful arc of supraspinatus tendinitis. 



292 15 Locomotor system ﻿
the end of abduction, blocking full elevation. Acute 
bursitis, however, may be so painful that no abduction 
is allowed (grade 4 discomfort). Acromioclavicular 
joint pain is always very localized and is typically felt 
in the last 10° of elevation (170-180° arc).

Special tests in shoulder examination
Supraspinatus
The supraspinatus muscle can be tested using the Flexion
‘empty can’ test which involves forward flexion of 
the arm to 90° and abduction to 30° with the thumb 
pointing upwards. The shoulder is then internally 
rotated so that the thumb is now facing downwards. 
The examiner places his hand on the arm and exerts 
downward pressure while the patient resists. Weakness 
or significant pain may indicate a muscle tear and 
further imaging is recommended (US or MRI). It is 
recommended that both arms be used in this test for 
comparison purposes. Hyper-

extension
Subscapularis Neutral Flexion and
The patient is asked to place his hand behind the hyperextension
back with the dorsum of the hand resting in the Figure 15.36  Movements of the elbow. 
region of the mid-lumbar spine (mainly internal 
rotation at the glenohumeral joint). The ability to 
actively lift the dorsum of the hand off the back 
constitutes a normal test with no dysfunction or 
rupture of subscapularis. extension exacerbates lateral epicondylar tenderness 

and wrist flexion exacerbates medial epicondylar 
Infraspinatus and teres minor tenderness. An elbow effusion may be palpated in 
Hornblower’s sign is an inability to externally rotate the posterior triangle formed by the epicondyles and 
the elevated arm. This movement indicates severe the olecranon.
infraspinatus and teres minor weakness. Placing the thumb and second and third fingers 
Long head of biceps on the lateral, medial epicondyles and olecranon, 
Hueter sign may indicate a ruptured tendon. The respectively, with the joint in an extended position 
patient is seated with the elbow extended and forearm produces a straight alignment. In a flexed position 
supinated. The elbow is then flexed by the patient these three points form a triangular shape. Disturbance 
against resistance. If the tendon is ruptured, a biceps of this geometric shift may indicate a supracondylar 
‘ball’ develops. fracture.

Yergason’s test indicates if there is bicipital tend-
initis. The patient’s elbow is flexed and the forearm The forearm
pronated. The examiner holds the arm at the wrist The neutral position is with the arm by the side, 
while the patient actively supinates against resistance. elbow flexed to 90° and thumb uppermost. The 
If this resisted movement produces pain located to following movements should be tested (Fig. 15.37):
the bicipital groove area, then pathology within the ■	 Supination.
long head of biceps tendon sheath is likely. ■	 Pronation.

The elbow The wrist
The neutral position is with the forearm in extension. Inspection of the wrist may reveal clear evidence of 
The following movements should be tested joint swelling or localized tenosynovitis. The distal 
(Fig. 15.36): ulna is usually visible as a smooth, rounded protrusion. 
■	 Flexion. Loss of the normal anatomical landmarks may suggest 
■	 Hyperextension. joint or tendon inflammation.

Medial (golfer’s elbow) and lateral (tennis elbow) Palpation of the wrist for warmth and swelling 
epicondylitis are the most common causes of elbow should be performed as well as specific palpation for 
pain. They are characterized by pain on active use tendon and bone discomfort. Palpation over the 
but if severe may be associated with night pain. anatomical snuff box resulting in pain may indicate 

Examination must define localized epicondylar a scaphoid fracture if there is a history of trauma. 
tenderness with pain on resisted movement. Wrist Tenderness along the ulnar aspect of the wrist may 



SECTION Three
293

Locomotor system ﻿
Radial            Ulnar

Supination Pronation

Supination and pronation
Deviation

Figure 15.37  Movements of the forearm. 

suggest inflammation of the extensor carpi ulnas 
tendon, commonly involved in early rheumatoid 
arthritis. At the distal end of the anatomical snuff 
box the base of the thumb (1st carpal-metacarpal 
joint) can be palpated, which is a commonly affected 
joint in generalized osteoarthritis in middle-aged and 
older patients.

The neutral position is with the hand in line with 
the forearm, and palm down. The following move-
ments should be tested (Fig. 15.38):

Neutral
■	 Dorsiflexion (extension).
■	 Palmar flexion.
■	 Ulnar deviation.
■	 Radial deviation.

Even minor limitation of wrist flexion or extension 
can be detected by comparing movement in both 
wrists (Fig. 15.39). Limitation of the wrist joints is 

Dorsal
usually due to inflammatory arthritis. Primary osteo-
arthritis of the wrist is rare, but secondary degenerative 
change is common.

The fingers
When identifying fingers, use the names thumb, index, 
middle, ring and little. Numbering tends to lead to Palmar

confusion. The neutral position is with the fingers in 
extension. Test flexion at the metacarpophalangeal 
(MCP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP) and distal 
interphalangeal (DIP) joints (Fig. 15.40). Flexion of the wrist

In fractures of the fingers, the commonest deformity Figure 15.38  Movements of the wrist. 
is rotational. If the finger will flex, make sure it points 
to the scaphoid tubercle (all the fingers will point 
individually in this direction). If it will not flex, look 
end-on at the nail and make sure it is parallel with 

■	 Opposition.
its fellows.

■	 Abduction (not illustrated; movement at right 

The thumb (carpometacarpal joint) angles to plane of palm).

The neutral position is with the thumb alongside the The hand
forefinger, and extended. The following movements 
should be tested (Fig. 15.41): Deformities in joint disease
■	 Extension. Examination of the individual joints of the hand may 
■	 Flexion (measured as for the fingers). be less informative than inspection of the hand as a 



294 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Neutral

Figure 15.39  Minor limitation of left wrist extension compared 
with the right. Note the slightly different angulation of the left 
forearm. 

Extension Opposition

Neutral Figure 15.41  Movements of the thumb. 

Flexion of MCP Proximal IP Distal IP joints

Figure 15.40  Movements of the fingers. 

Figure 15.42  Functional ability. Severe joint deformity due to 
psoriatic arthropathy but retention of function and artistic ability. 

whole (Fig. 15.42). The combination of Heberden’s 
nodes and thumb carpometacarpal arthritis occurs 
in osteoarthritis (see Fig. 15.24). Pain and subluxation 
of the carpometacarpal joint is a typical feature of 
primary nodal osteoarthritis, leading to a ‘square 
hand’ appearance on making a fist.

A variety of patterns of deformity are characteristic 
of long-standing rheumatoid arthritis. For example, 
metacarpophalangeal joint subluxation, ulnar deviation 
of the fingers at the metacarpophalangeal joints, ‘swan 
neck’ (Fig. 15.43) and ‘boutonnière’ deformities 
(flexed proximal and hyperextended distal inter- Figure 15.43  Swan-neck deformity of the right hand. Note also 
phalangeal joints) of the fingers are typical in advanced wasting of the small muscles of the hand owing to disuse in this 
disease. This is due to the head of the phalanx sliding patient with rheumatoid arthritis. 



SECTION Three
295

Locomotor system ﻿
dorsally between the lateral slips of the extensor Box 15.13  Hip movements to be tested
tendon, the middle slip having been damaged. In 
psoriatic arthritis, terminal interphalangeal joint ■	 Flexion: measured with knee bent. Opposite thigh must 
swelling may occur, with psoriatic pitting and ridging remain in neutral position. Flex the knee as the hip 
of the nail (onychopathy) on that digit. Jaccoud’s flexes.
arthropathy produces a similar appearance to swan ■	 Abduction: measured from a line that forms an angle of 
neck and boutonniere deformity alongside thumb 90° with a line joining the anterior superior iliac spines.
subluxation and ulnar deviation. However, these ■	 Adduction (measured in the same manner).
deformities are reducible when the patient is asked ■	 Rotation in flexion.
to make a fist as a result of no underlying structural ■	 Rotation in extension.
joint damage. This arthropathy may be seen in SLE ■	 Extension: attempt to extend the hip with the patient 
and Sjögren’s syndrome. lying in the lateral or prone position.

Deformities due to neuropathy
The hand may adopt a posture typical of a nerve the leg raised. When the weight-bearing hip is 
lesion (see Ch. 16). Slight hyperextension of the abnormal, owing to pain or subluxation, the 
medial metacarpophalangeal joints with slight flexion pelvis sags downwards due to weakness of the 
of the interphalangeal joints is the ‘ulnar claw hand’ hip abductors on the affected side.
of an ulnar nerve lesion. There is wasting of the small ■	 Measurement of ‘true’ and ‘apparent’ 
muscles of the hypothenar eminence, with loss of shortening. The length of the legs is measured 
sensation of the palmar and dorsal aspects of the from the anterior superior iliac spine to the 
little finger and of the ulnar half of the ring finger. medial malleolus on the same side. Any 
In a median nerve lesion, the thenar eminence (abduc- difference is termed ‘true’ shortening and may 
tor pollicis brevis) will be flattened (see Fig. 15.18) result from disease of either the hip joint or the 
and sensory impairment will be found on the palmar neck of the femur on the shorter side. 
surfaces of the thumb, index, middle and radial half ‘Apparent’ shortening is due to tilting of the 
of the ring fingers. Remember that carpal tunnel pelvis and can be measured by comparing the 
syndrome may be a presenting feature of wrist lengths of the two legs, measured from the 
inflammation. umbilicus, provided there is no true shortening 

of one leg. Apparent shortening is usually due 
Assessment of hand function to an abduction deformity of the hip. Femoral 
Assessment of hand function (see Fig. 15.42) should or tibial shortening may be demonstrated with 
include testing hand grip and pinch grip (between the patient lying on a couch and looking across 
index and thumb). The latter may be decreased in both knees held equally flexed.
lesions in the line of action of the thumb metacarpal, 
particularly scaphoid fractures. The knee
The hip MRI scans of the normal knee are illustrated in Fig. 

15.45. The neutral position is complete extension. 
The neutral position is with the hip in extension and Observe any valgus (lateral angulation of the tibia) 
the patella pointing forwards. Ensure the pelvis does or varus (medial angulation) deformity on the couch 
not tilt by placing one hand over it while examining and on standing. Look for muscle wasting. The 
the hip with the other. Look for scars and wasting quadriceps, especially the medial part near the knee, 
of the gluteal and thigh muscles. The hip joint is too wastes rapidly in knee joint disease. Swelling may be 
deeply placed to be accessible to palpation. Hip obvious, particularly if it distends the suprapatellar 
movements to be tested are listed in Box 15.13  pouch. Check the apparent height of the patella and 
(Fig. 15.44). watch to see if it deviates to one side in flexion or 

extension of the knee. Feel for tenderness at the joint 
Additional examination of the hip joint margins, not forgetting the patellofemoral joint. Palpate 
■	 Test for flexion deformity. With one hand flat the ligaments, remembering that the medial collateral 

between the lumbar spine and the couch, flex ligament is attached 8 cm below the joint line. 
the normal hip fully to the point of abolishing Measure the girth of the thigh muscles 10 cm above 
the lumbar lordosis. The spine will come down the upper pole of the patella.
onto the hand, pressing it onto the couch. If 
there is a flexion deformity on the opposite side, Joint swelling
the leg on that side will move into a flexed The presence of swelling in the knee joint may 
position (Thomas’ test). be confirmed by the patellar tap test or, for small 

■	 Trendelenburg test. Observe the patient from effusions, by the bulge test, in which the medial 
behind and ask him to stand on one leg. In parapatellar fossa is emptied by pressure of the flat 
health, the pelvis tilts upwards on the side with of the hand sweeping proximally. The bulge is seen to 



296 15 Locomotor system ﻿
Neutral a deep vein thrombosis. When intact, large poste

rior knee cysts can sometimes cause venous 
obstruction.

The movements of the knee are flexion and exten-
sion (Fig. 15.46). Loss of flexion can be documented 
by loss of the angle of flexion or loss of heel-to-buttock 
distance, either in the crouching position or on the 
couch. Loss of extension is detected by inability to 

Flexion get the back of the knee onto the flat examining 
couch. Hyperextension must be sought by lifting 
the foot with the knee extended and comparing 
with the normal side. Lack of full extension by 

Flexion of the hip comparison with the normal constitutes fixed flexion 
Internal External deformity. Loose bodies in the joint cause crepitus, 

interruption of movement (locking) and pain and 
effusion (Fig. 15.47).

Testing for stability
Cruciate ligaments
Anterior/posterior drawer test. The patient should 
be situated on the couch with the knee placed in 
90° flexion. If there is a posterior sag on inspection, 

Rotation in extension this may provide a false-positive anterior drawer sign. 
Place both hands around the upper part of the leg 
with both thumbs placed on the tibial tuberosity and 
fingers around the posterior aspect of the knee. With 
your forearm resting on the shin, firmly pull the tibia 
anterior. If there is significant forward movement of 
the tibia plateau, this suggests an anterior cruciate 
tear. Pushing backwards with posterior movement of 
the tibial plateau may suggest a posterior cruciate 
pathology.

Collateral ligaments
The collateral ligaments are best assessed with the 
knee in 30° of flexion. Place your right hand on 

Abduction Adduction the lower limb (medial mid-calf) and left hand on 
Abduction and adduction the upper lateral thigh. Gradually apply opposing 

force to detect excessive medial movement of the 
lower limb. This tests the integrity of the medial 
collateral ligament. Reverse hand positions (left 
hand on lateral mid-calf and right hand on medial 
lower thigh) and repeat the movement to test the 
lateral collateral ligament. Pain on testing indicates 
possible enthesitis or tear. Excessive movement 
can be seen in the context of joint hypermobility 
which should be considered as part of the overall 

Internal External examination.

The ankle
The ankle is a hinge joint with movement only in 

Rotation in flexion the sagittal plane. The neutral position is with the 
Figure 15.44  Movements of the hip. outer border of the foot at an angle of 90° with the 

leg and midway between inversion and eversion. 
refill as the suprapatellar area is emptied by pressure Observe the patient from behind in the standing 
from the flat hand. Posterior knee joint (Baker’s) position. With any long-standing ankle disorder, there 
cysts, particularly in rheumatoid arthritis, may be will be a loss of calf muscle bulk.
palpable in the popliteal fossa. They sometimes Look at the position of the foot with the patient 
rupture, producing calf pain, and may then mimic standing. The heel may tilt outwards (valgus deformity) 



SECTION Three
297

Locomotor system ﻿

A B

Figure 15.45  MRI scans of the normal knee (MR image, T1-weighted).  
(A) Scan to show the medial (5) and lateral (6) menisci, origin of the anterior 
cruciate ligament (4) and the articular cartilages (3) and synovial fluid (7). 
Other structures shown are (1) tibia, (2) articular surfaces of femur. (B) The 
anterior cruciate ligament (4). Other structures shown are (1) tibia, (2) femur, 

C (3) patella. (C) The posterior cruciate ligament (4). Other structures shown are 
(1) tibia, (2) femur, (3) patella, (5) patellar tendon, (6) joint space. 

in subtalar joint damage. Inward (varus deformity) prolapsed intervertebral disc. Look for abnormalities 
is much less common and usually not so painful. of posture.
Flattening of the longitudinal arch of the foot (pes Callosities are areas of hard skin under points of 
planus) also produces valgus at the heel, but the abnormal pressure. The most common site is beneath 
foot curves laterally as well because the change is the metatarsal heads because loss of the normal soft 
in the mid-tarsal joints in addition to the subtalar tissue pad allows abnormal loading. There may be 
joint. abnormal spread of two adjacent toes (daylight sign: 

The following movements should be tested Fig. 15.49) on weight-bearing if there is synovitis 
(Fig. 15.48): between the metatarsal heads. Check for lateral 
■	 Dorsiflexion: test with the knee in flexion and deviation of the big toe (hallux valgus), usually 

extension to exclude tight calf muscles. associated with abnormal swelling at its base (a 
■	 Plantarflexion: place a finger on the head  bunion). There may be deformities affecting any or 

of the talus to be sure that it is moving. A all toes, with abnormal curvature (claw toes), fixed 
hypermobile subtalar joint can mimic flexion of the terminal joint (hammer toes) or 
movement in an arthrodesed ankle. overriding.

The foot consists of three regions: hind foot (subtalar 
The foot joint), mid-foot (tarsal joints) and fore-foot (MTP, 

PIP, DIP joints). The following movements should 
Remember that complaints apparently relating to be tested (Fig. 15.50):
the foot may be features of systemic disease, such as ■	 Subtalar inversion and eversion: cup the heel in 
gout, or of referred vertebral problems such as a the hands and move it in relation to the tibia 



298 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Neutral

Neutral

Dorsiflexion
(extension)

Flexion
Plantar
flexion

Figure 15.46  Movements of the knee. Figure 15.48  Movements of the ankle. 

Figure 15.49  Daylight sign due to metatarsophalangeal joint 
synovitis in rheumatoid arthritis. 

■	 Metatarsophalangeal and interphalangeal 
flexion/extension.

Also look for tenderness or swelling at the Achilles 
tendon insertion on the back of the calcaneum and 
for plantar tenderness at the site of the plantar fascial 
insertion. Inflammation of these attachments 
(enthesopathy) is common in ankylosing spondylitis 

Figure 15.47  Loose body in tunnel view X-ray of knee, showing and other spondyloarthropathies.
the loose body in the intercondylar space. 

Achilles tendon rupture
Thompson test: This test requires positioning the 
patient in the prone position with the feet hanging 

without any up and down movement; this off the table. The clinician then squeezes the patient’s 
eliminates movement at the ankle or mid-tarsal calf muscle which should shorten the Achilles tendon 
joints. causing the ankle to plantar flex. It is important to 

■	 Mid-tarsal inversion/eversion and adduction/ note that false negative results may occur in older 
abduction: hold the os calcis in the neutral injuries, where organization of a hematoma can cause 
position in one hand and grasp and rotate the some reconstitution of the tendon or with an incom-
forefoot in the other. plete partial tear. Patients may still be able to walk 



SECTION Three
299

Locomotor system ﻿

Eversion           Inversion
1

Forefoot Forefoot Flexion        Extension Figure 15.51  Hyperextensibility of the digits in Ehlers-Danlos 
adduction abduction syndrome. 

subjects and is frequently familial. It is also a feature 
of two inherited connective tissue disorders, Marfan 
syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Repeated 
trauma, haemarthrosis or dislocation may produce 
permanent joint damage. Hypermobility is often 
generalized but may occur at a single joint and must 
be considered if considerable joint lax is demonstrated 

2 3 on examination.

Figure 15.50  Movements of the foot. Work-related musculoskeletal disorders
Musculoskeletal pain arising as a result of a patient’s 

and actively plantar flex the ankle despite significant occupation is an increasingly recognized cause of 
Achilles tendon tear. When an index of suspicion of disability and economic loss. For example, spinal pain 
an Achilles tear or rupture arises, imaging with may be ascribed to poor seating in sedentary occupa-
ultrasound or MRI is recommended. tions. Likewise, an occupational history of repetitive 

movements may be relevant to upper limb pain. 
The gait Assessment by an occupational health physician and 
It is best to study gait with the patient’s legs and an occupational therapist may be needed to consider 
feet fully exposed and without socks, shoes or workplace alterations.
slippers. Ask the patient to walk away from you, 
to turn around at a given point and then to walk Investigations in rheumatic diseases
towards you.

Abnormalities of gait are usually due either to joint When a full history and examination have been 
problems in the legs or to neurological disorder, completed, investigations should be considered to 
although alcohol intoxication or malingering may support the working diagnosis or to distinguish 
occasionally cause difficulty. A full examination of between different possible diagnoses. They can broadly 
the legs and feet should reveal any local cause, which be defined as:
may range from a painful corn to osteoarthritis of •	 tests in support of inflammatory disease
the hip. Abnormalities due to neurological disorders •	 diagnostic tests including biopsies and 
are described in Chapter 16. imaging investigations.

Hypermobility Tests in support of inflammatory disease
There is a wide variation in the range of normal The acute-phase reactant tests that are used in the 
joint movement, associated with age, sex and race. assessment of inflammatory disease activity and in 
Excessive laxity or hypermobility of the joints (Fig. the subsequent monitoring of the patient are listed 
15.51) can be defined in about 10% of healthy in Box 15.14.



300 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.14	 Common biochemical tests for inflammatory frequently found in patients with other connective 
rheumatic conditions tissue diseases, for example SLE and Sjögren’s syn-

drome, or other inflammatory disorders such as 
Acute-phase reactant tests that are used in the assessment subacute bacterial endocarditis and some viral 
of inflammatory disease activity and in the subsequent infections.
monitoring of the patient: Approximately 50% of patients with rheumatoid 
■	 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). This is a useful arthritis who present to a rheumatologist are positive 

screening test although it has poor specificity, being for rheumatoid factor or anti-CCP antibodies when 
affected by the levels of haemoglobin, globulins and they initially present, rising to 70-80% at a later time 
fibrinogen. Higher mean values are seen in healthy point. Therefore a negative serology test does not 
elderly individuals. exclude rheumatoid arthritis as a diagnosis.

■	 C-reactive protein (CRP). This is a more specific 
indicator of inflammation and is a good marker of the Antinuclear antibody tests
acute-phase response. A high ESR with a normal CRP is Antinuclear antibody (ANA), often referred to as 
a useful pointer towards autoimmune rheumatic antinuclear factor (ANF), is a very useful screening 
diseases, especially SLE. test for SLE as it is positive in up to 95% of patients. 

■	 Plasma viscosity. This is a more specific measure of the It is, however, non-specific, being positive in many 
acute-phase response than ESR, but may not be as other autoimmune rheumatic disorders, including 
widely available. about 20% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A 

■	 Anaemia and thrombocytosis. Anaemia of chronic positive test in children with arthritis may be associ-
disease and a high platelet count often occur in ated with chronic iridocyclitis, which is frequently 
inflammatory disease but are non-specific. Other asymptomatic. Slit-lamp examination of the eye is 
abnormalities on blood count, such as neutropenia, mandatory to confirm the diagnosis.
thrombocytopenia and lymphopenia, are common in SLE. The ANA test detects antibodies to intracellular 

■	 Serum complement. Low levels of serum complement nuclear and cytoplasmic antigens and is carried out 
reflect activation due to immune complex deposition; by incubating the patient’s serum with cells such as 
this may be a marker of disease activity in autoimmune Hep-2 cells. After washing, a fluorescent antiserum 
diseases such as SLE. Hereditary complement to human IgG is used to detect human antibody 
deficiencies are also associated with SLE. adhering to the intracellular and nuclear antigens. A 

■	 Muscle enzymes. Elevated creatine kinase levels occur in titre of 1 : 80 or more is significant, and adequate 
most patients with inflammatory myopathy. standardization is important.

DNA-binding test
Diagnostic tests Different immunochemical techniques (Farr assay or 
Diagnostic tests differentiate between specific diseases ELISA) may be used to detect antibodies to native 
and are relatively specific investigations. double-stranded DNA. Another method is indirect 

immunofluorescence using the protozoon Crithidia 
Tests for rheumatoid factor luciliae, where the kinetoplast at the tail containing 
Rheumatoid factors are autoantibodies in the form of DNA fluoresces. The test is usually reserved for 
immunoglobulin (Ig) directed against other immuno- patients with a positive ANA test and is specific for 
globulin G (IgG) molecules. IgM rheumatoid factor SLE but not as sensitive as ANA. Occasionally it is 
can be detected by its ability to clump particles coated positive in patients in whom the clinical suspicion 
with human IgG (latex test). This test is positive in of SLE is very high but the ANA test is negative.
about 80% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
Results are reported as a titre, 1 : 80 or higher being a Antibody tests to extractable nuclear  
positive result. The original Rose-Waaler haemaggluti- antigens (ENA)
nation test used sheep erythrocytes coated with rabbit Box 15.15 shows tests that may be indicated by 
IgG to detect IgM (titres of 1 : 32 or more are positive); a speckled staining pattern in the ANA test. They 
it has now been replaced by other tests. Enzyme-linked can be summarized in terms of their clinical associa-
immunosorbent serum assay (ELISA) techniques are tions. Other diagnostic antibody tests are shown in 
much more sensitive but produce positive results in Box 15.16.
many other conditions. Anti-citrullinated protein/
peptide antibodies (ACPA) are a specific marker for Uric acid
rheumatoid arthritis and their presence indicates a A consistently normal plasma uric acid level 
poor prognosis, with patients at greater risk of joint (<375 mmol/l in women, <425 mmol/l in men) 
damage, disability and loss of function. usually excludes the diagnosis of untreated gout. 

These rheumatoid factor screening tests are useful Raised levels occur in many circumstances and do 
where a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis is suspected, not in themselves establish the diagnosis of gout (see 
but they are not specific. Rheumatoid factor is below). On a low-purine diet, the 24-hour urinary 



SECTION Three
301

Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.15  Extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) tests Box 15.16	 Other helpful immunology tests in  
rheumatic disease

These tests may be indicated by a speckled staining 
pattern in the ANA test. They can be summarized in terms ■	 Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are a marker for 
of their clinical associations: vasculitic conditions. Two immunofluorescence staining 
■	 Anti-Ro (SSA) and anti-La (SSB), typically in Sjögren’s patterns occur:

syndrome. Also seen in SLE, where they are associated 1	 Cytoplasmic or c-ANCA, with specificity for proteinase 
with photosensitivity, and the neonatal lupus syndrome, 3 (a neutrophil enzyme), is specific for Wegener’s 
which may result in congenital heart block and neonatal granulomatosis (Fig. 15.52)
rashes. 2	 Perinuclear or p-ANCA, with specificity for 

■	 Anti-Sm in 5-10% of patients with SLE; a very specific myeloperoxidase (and some other neutrophil 
marker if present. enzymes), occurs in microscopic polyangiitis and 

■	 Anti-RNP (ribonucleoprotein) in some cases of SLE. Also other vasculitic diseases (and inflammatory bowel 
picks out a group of patients who have clinical features disease).
of other autoimmune rheumatic disorders and who are ■	 Antiphospholipid antibodies include anticardiolipin 
therefore often diagnosed as mixed connective-tissue antibodies, β2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies and the lupus 
disease (MCTD). The test can be considered a marker for anticoagulant tests and are associated with the 
the combination of clinical features, but the major antiphospholipid syndrome, characterized by arterial and 
clinical component of the condition will define venous thromboses and, in women, recurrent pregnancy 
management. loss and pregnancy morbidity. A false positive VDRL (see 

■	 Anticentromere antibody is found in limited cutaneous Ch. 17) may also be found in these patients.
systemic sclerosis or ‘CREST syndrome’ (calcinosis, ■	 Anti-Jo 1 (histidyl t-RNA synthetase) is a marker for the 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, oesophageal symptoms, idiopathic inflammatory myopathies such as 
sclerodactyly and telangiectasiae). dermatomyositis and polymyositis, especially when 

■	 Anti-Scl 70 (DNA topoisomerase I) and anti-RNA complicated by interstitial lung disease.
polymerase are found in scleroderma and are associated ■	 Cryoglobulins are detected by clotting whole blood at 
with severe disease. 37°C and cooling the serum to 4°C and looking for a 

precipitate which is usually an IgM rheumatoid factor. 
Cryoglobulins are associated with vasculitis, infections 

urate excretion should not exceed 600 mg. Higher such as hepatitis C and myeloproliferative disorders.
levels indicate ‘overproduction’ of urate and a risk ■	 Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing: the association 
of renal stone formation. of tissue antigen HLA-B27 with ankylosing spondylitis 

remains the strongest association in medicine. Although 
Synovial fluid examination about 95% of ankylosing spondylitis patients in the UK 
Synovial fluid may be obtained for examination from possess the B27 antigen, it is also found in 8% of the 
any joint in which it is clinically detectable. The normal population. Ankylosing spondylitis, therefore, 
knee is the most convenient source: after infiltra- remains a clinical diagnosis, supported by typical 
tion with a local anaesthetic, a 21-gauge needle is radiographic findings. However, in early disease, in 
inserted into the joint between the patella and the children with peripheral arthritis or where the clinical 
femoral condyle. For smaller, more inaccessible joints, findings are atypical, HLA-B27 typing may provide 
such as the wrist or MCP, an ultrasound guided supportive diagnostic value.
aspiration should be considered. The aspirated fluid ■	 Antistreptolysin-O (ASO) test: the presence in the serum 
should be placed in a plain sterile container; if a of this antibody in a titre greater than 1/200, rising on 
cell count is required, some of the fluid should be repeat testing after about 2 weeks, indicates a recent 
mixed with ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid (EDTA) haemolytic streptococcal infection.
anticoagulant. ■	 Viral titres. Certain viruses, notably parvovirus and 

An injured joint can also be aspirated (Box 15.17). Coxsackie virus, may cause transient musculoskeletal 
The joint swollen after injury may reveal clear pink symptoms which may be mistaken for systemic 
fluid suggesting a meniscal lesion, or show frank diseases. Rising viral titres may be useful in the 
blood. The latter is usually indicative of a torn anterior differential diagnosis.
cruciate ligament. If blood is aspirated, look at its 
surface for fat globules. This is derived from the 
marrow and confirms an intra-articular fracture. examination is unlikely to be diagnostic. Frank blood 
Synovial fluid examination is diagnostic in two condi- may point to trauma, haemophilia or villonodular 
tions – bacterial infections and crystal synovitis – and synovitis, whereas inflammatory (as opposed to 
every effort should be made to obtain fluid when degenerative) arthritis is suggested by opaque fluid 
either of these is suspected. Polarized light microscopy of low viscosity, with a total white cell count >1000/
can differentiate between the crystals of urate in gout ml, neutrophils >50%, protein content >35 g/l and 
and those of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate in the presence of a firm clot. Culture of this fluid may 
pseudogout. Outside these conditions, synovial fluid produce a bacterial growth, usually of staphylococci, 



302 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.17  Findings in synovial fluid after aspiration of Box 15.18	 Biopsy procedures and tissue harvesting that 
the knee joint may be useful in the differential diagnosis of 

rheumatic diseases
■	 Cloudy fluid or pus: bacterial infection (see text)
■	 Urate or pyrophosphate crystals: gout or pseudogout ■	 Muscle biopsy should be considered in patients with 
■	 Pink fluid: torn meniscus inflammatory myopathies such as dermatomyositis, 
■	 Blood: trauma, haemophilia, villonodular synovitis polymyositis and inclusion body myositis. 

Electromyography may show typical features of 
myopathy and biopsy may be guided by MRI of muscles 
(Fig. 15.53).

■	 Rectal biopsy can be useful in the diagnosis of 
amyloidosis secondary to chronic inflammatory disease, 
but renal biopsy may still be necessary if the cause of 
renal impairment is not clear.

■	 Renal biopsy is essential in the vasculitides or SLE 
where active glomerulonephritis is suspected. Vasculitis 
may also be confirmed on renal biopsy but, in general, 
tissues found to be abnormal on clinical examination or 
by further investigation (e.g. skin, muscle, sural nerve or 
liver) should be considered first for diagnostic biopsy in 
undifferentiated systemic vasculitis.

■	 Biopsy of a lip minor salivary gland may be useful to 
confirm Sjögren’s syndrome.

■	 Temporal artery biopsy is often diagnostic in patients 
with clinical features of temporal (giant cell) arteritis. 
This is the investigation of choice.

Figure 15.52  Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibodies with ■	 Synovial biopsy is of little value in the differential 
cytoplasmic staining (c-ANCA). This pattern has a high predictive diagnosis of inflammatory polyarthritis but should be 
value for a diagnosis of Wegener’s granulomatosis. considered in any unusual monoarthritis to exclude 

infection, particularly tuberculous, or rare conditions 
such as sarcoid, amyloid arthropathy or villonodular 

but occasionally Mycobacterium tuberculosis or other synovitis. This may be performed by arthroscopy or using 
organisms. a semi-automated guillotine needle under ultrasound 

guidance.

Biopsies useful in differential diagnosis ■	 Bone biopsy. May be useful in the diagnosis of 
osteomalacia, malignancy, renal osteodystrophy and 

Box 15.18 shows tests that may be useful in the Paget’s disease. The bone marrow can also be aspirated 
differential diagnosis of rheumatic diseases. at the same time if necessary.

Radiological examination
Certain general principles are important, particularly 
as clinicians may be asked to give an opinion on radio-
graphs of limbs after traumatic injury, whether minor 
or more serious (Box 15.19). Common problems are 
shown in Figs 15.54-15.57. A systematic approach is 
essential (Box 15.20).

Bone density (Table 15.6) may be normal, reduced 
(osteopenia) or increased (osteosclerosis). These 
changes are easy to detect if focal, but difficult if 
diffuse. When a focal bone lesion (Box 15.21) is 
noted, look at its position in the bone and at its 
margins, and note whether there is any focal matrix 
calcification, whether the cortex of the bone is intact 
and whether there is any periosteal reaction around 
it. Most solitary bone lesions in young people are 
benign and show no periosteal reaction or swelling 
around them, and no associated soft-tissue swelling. 
Aggressive (malignant) bone lesions are more common Figure 15.53  MRI scan of thigh muscles showing high signal 
in the elderly. Certain bone metastases have a lesions of inflammatory myositis. 



SECTION Three
303

Locomotor system ﻿

Box 15.19  General principles of musculoskeletal imaging Box 15.21  Benign and malignant bone lesions
■	 Use a systematic approach (see Box 15.13) Benign
■	 Age, sex and clinical information are essential in ■	 Young person

interpretation ■	 Single lesion
■	 Radiographs reveal bones and soft tissues ■	 Well-defined margin
■	 Always obtain two views, at right angles, in trauma ■	 Intact cortex

patients ■	 No periosteal reaction
■	 Radiographs may be normal even in the presence of ■	 No growth

disease ■	 Asymptomatic
■	 Diffuse abnormalities are difficult to detect Malignant
■	 Bone-based and joint-based disease must be 

■
differentiated 	 Older age

■
■	 Normal variants can be confused with pathology 	 Multiple lesions

■	 Poorly defined margin
■	 Destroyed cortex
■	 Periosteal reaction

Box 15.20  Systematic approach to musculoskeletal ■	 Soft-tissue extension of lesion
imaging ■	 Lesions painful

■	 Bone density
■	 Soft tissues
■	 Joints Box 15.22  Bone metastases
■	 Bone
■	 Periosteum ■	 Expansile – thyroid, kidney, breast, bronchus, melanoma 

and myeloma
■	 Sclerotic – prostate and breast
■	 Lytic – breast, bronchus, kidney, thyroid and melanoma
■	 Mixed – breast, bladder, or previously treated 

(irradiated) bone lesions

Figure 15.54  Healed fracture of posterior left and right ribs in a 
6-month-old infant, classic non-accidental injury (NAI). 

Figure 15.55  Benign bone tumour (adamantinoma). Note the 
characteristic appearance (Box 15.22). Isotope imaging solitary well-defined lucent lesion with a sclerotic margin and the 
is useful in detecting multiple sites of bony involve- absence of matrix calcification. 

ment in generalized disease and in metastatic cancer. 
CT imaging is also sensitive in detecting and analysing The commonest use of plain radiographs is to 
bony lesions, as it provides good images of the bony document joint pathology such as osteoarthritis (joint 
margins of the lesions and of the associated soft space narrowing, periarticular sclerosis, subchondral 
tissues. MRI is used to assess the extent of the lesion cysts and osteophytes) or inflammatory conditions 
and any local soft tissue invasion. such as rheumatoid arthritis (joint space narrowing, 



304 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Table 15.6  Abnormal bone density
Benign focal lucent Benign focal 

Generalized osteopenia Generalized osteosclerosis lesions sclerotic lesions
Ageing osteoporosis Osteopetrosis (marble bone Simple bone cyst, Bone island

disease) aneurysmal bone cyst
Metastatic bone disease, e.g. Fibrous cortical defect Callus after 
prostate and breast cancer fracture

Disuse, e.g. trauma and neurogenic Dietary causes, e.g. Non-ossifying fibroma Paget’s disease 
paralysis, osteogenesis imperfecta hypervitaminosis A, fluorosis of bone
Acquired metabolic bone disease, e.g. Acquired metabolic bone disease, Enchondroma Bone infarction
rickets, osteomalacia, hyperparathyroidism e.g. renal osteodystrophy Osteoid osteoma
Myeloma Myelofibrosis, sickle cell disease Fibrous dysplasia, giant Fibrous 

cell tumour of bone dysplasia

A

Figure 15.57  Renal osteodystrophy: generalized demineralization, 
terminal phalangeal and subperiosteal bone resorption and 
vascular calcification. 

peri-articular osteopenia, erosions and subsequent 
boney ankylosis). Imaging of the hands and feet is 
most commonly performed when investigating an 
inflammatory arthritis, as subclinical inflammation 
and joint description may occur in the absence of 
frank joint inflammation. Osteoarthritis requires a 
more focused approach to imaging of symptomatic 
joints. While imaging changes characteristic of 
degenerative joint disease can be detected by plain 
radiographs, they do not correlate well with symptom 
severity.

B Fractures
X-rays are often the first investigation in suspected 

Figure 15.56  (A) Early rheumatoid arthritis: local osteopenia, fractures and in joint disease. In traumatic fractures, 
loss of joint spaces, soft-tissue swelling. (B) Late rheumatoid X-rays are diagnostic and are used to check alignment 
arthritis: erosion of periarticular surfaces and ulnar subluxation. of the fracture and healing. X-rays of a fracture are 

also important in excluding pathological fracture 
associated with metabolic bone disease, a focal benign 



SECTION Three
305

Locomotor system ﻿
bone lesion or neoplastic invasion by metastases. 
When there is clinical doubt after a non-diagnostic 
X-ray, an MRI scan often reveals the underlying 
fracture and is the investigation of choice. Radiographs 
taken to confirm or exclude a fracture must be taken 
in two planes. It is essential that either the whole 
limb is turned or the imaging equipment rotated. 
The limb must not be twisted at the fracture site. 
When looking for a fracture, run a pen tip or its 
equivalent around the cortex of the bone as seen on 
the film (without leaving marks). Any break in 
continuity will reveal itself; do not confuse an epi-
physis with a fracture. Note soft-tissue swelling and 
distension of joints. Always seek a radiology opinion 
if in doubt.

In joint disease, MRI is the imaging method of choice 
because it can visualize all the soft-tissue components 
of the joints. Osteopenia is a non-specific feature of 
disuse but also occurs in relation to affected joints 
in rheumatoid arthritis and Still’s disease of children. 
Involvement of the distal interphalangeal joint is a 
feature of psoriatic arthropathy. In rheumatoid disease, 
the involvement of joints is usually symmetrical, and 
the wrist is particularly susceptible.

Only radiographs likely to yield specific information A
should be requested. However, in unilateral joint 
disease, it is useful to examine both sides for com-
parison (Fig. 15.58). In patients with inflammatory 
polyarthritis, three routine films are helpful in the 
diagnosis and assessment of progression, with both 
hands and wrists on one plate and both feet on another 
to compare bone density and to look for periosteal 
reaction or erosive change, and one of the full pelvis 
(Fig. 15.59) to show the sacroiliac and hip joints. In 
the absence of so-called ‘red flag’ signs, for example, 
weight loss, night pain, fevers or neurological signs, 
most spinal radiographs are unnecessary.

Specialized radiology
The following imaging techniques can provide precise 
information about localized pathology but are depend-
ent on the clinician making a clear diagnostic request 
with as much clinical information as possible:
■	 High-resolution ultrasound is of value in 

defining soft-tissue structures, including muscles 
and tendons, and provides an excellent means 
for guiding aspiration of joint effusions and 
biopsy procedures. Ultrasound has been 
consistently demonstrated to be more sensitive 
than clinical examination in the context of joint 
inflammation and provides considerable 
additional information in the diagnosis and B
management of inflammatory arthritis. 
Grey-scale synovial thickening and power Figure 15.58  Left and right knee joints. The X-rays show normal 
Doppler signal reflect histologically defined joint anatomy but with chondrocalcinosis (A) and osteoarthritic 
synovitis and can be used to differentiate change (B) on the opposite side. Note the increased bone density 

and narrowing of the joint space. 
between true joint pathology and fibromyalgia 
and other pain syndromes. In addition, this 
imaging modality has the unique capacity to be 
used in a dynamic fashion allowing tendon, 



306 15 Locomotor system ﻿

Figure 15.60  CT scan of sacroiliac joints, showing distinctive 
lesion on the left side with a sequestrum due to tuberculosis. 

Figure 15.59  X-ray of lumbosacral spine and upper pelvis. There In the context of inflammatory arthritis, MRI 
is fusion of several vertebrae, and of the sacroiliac joints (arrows) imaging has much to recommend it as an imaging 
from ankylosing spondylitis. The renal papillae on the left are modality. There is a clear relationship with bone 
calcified, evidence of previous papillary necrosis from prolonged marrow oedema on MRI and the subsequent develop-
analgesic use. ment of erosive arthritis providing an early indicator 

of potential poor prognosis. Erosive disease, when 
present, is detected earlier than with plain radiographs 
and changes in synovial inflammation can be readily 

ligament and joint function to be observed in detected after therapeutic intervention. A standard-
real time. Rotator cuff pathology at the shoulder ized, validated scoring system has been developed 
is amenable to ultrasound imaging and is often (RAMRIS - Rheumatoid Arthritis MRI Scoring) which 
the first imaging investigation of choice when encompasses multiple elements of MRI detected 
assessing the integrity of the muscle and synovial inflammation and joint damage.
tendons of these structures. Ultrasound can Enhancement by the use of intravenous paramag-
detect erosions and joint damage at a very early netic contrast (e.g. gadolinium) has further improved 
stage of disease before X-ray changes are definition in spinal imaging.
demonstrated. MRI is invaluable when assessing the degree of 

■	 CT. The combination of superior tissue contrast spinal involvement in spondyloarthropathies, such as 
and tomographic technique permits definition ankylosing spondylitis, particularly in early disease 
of soft-tissue structures obscured by overlapping where radiography ankylosis is absent. Both costo-
structures, including intervertebral discs and vertebral and sacroiliac joints are readily imaged with 
other joints normally difficult to visualize, such good sensitivity for inflammatory pathology.
as sacroiliac (Fig. 15.60), sternoclavicular and It is of particular value in the non-invasive investiga-
subtalar. Bone pathology is particularly well tion of disc disease (Fig. 15.61), including spinal 
characterized on CT imaging, e.g. malignancy, infection, and is a sensitive technique for the diagnosis 
erosive disease or fracture. of avascular necrosis. MRI scanning of the brain and 

■	 MRI has unique advantages in evaluating the spine is the single most important investigation in 
musculoskeletal system, but it is vital that the neuroimaging, as the neural tissues themselves, 
clinician defines the pathology suspected, as together with supporting tissues, are well visualized. 
correct positioning and sequence selection Bone is less well seen with this technique. As a rule 
(T-weighting) are vital in optimizing image of thumb, most abnormalities appear dark on 
quality. MRI is increasingly used to image the T1-weighted images and white on T2-weighted images. 
major joints in the limbs, especially the knee Some common problems are shown in Figs 15.53, 
(see Fig. 15.45), hip, shoulder and elbow. 15.61 and 15.62.



SECTION Three
307

Locomotor system ﻿
■	 Isotopic scanning (scintigraphy) can be  

used in the diagnosis of acute (e.g. infection 
or stress fracture) or multiple (e.g. metastases) 
bone lesions by use of the first 2-minute 
(dynamic blood flow) phase, second 10-minute 
(blood pool) phase and third 3-hour late  
phase (osteoblastic) (Fig. 15.63) following 
intravenous injection of diphosphonate 
compounds. Tomographic scintigraphy 
can further refine definition of the isotope 
uptake (e.g. in stress fracture of the pars 
interarticularis). Radionucleotide bone  
scans are more sensitive than plain radiographs 
for the diagnosis of Paget’s disease and in 
polyostotic cases help to quantify the overall 
burden of disease. Scintigraphy has a high 
sensitivity to metabolically active lesions; 
however, it is relatively non-specific and is  
often used in conjunction with other imaging  
modalities.

Figure 15.61  A lumbar spine MRI scan. There is a disc ■	 Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)  
protrusion at L4/5 with degeneration of the disc itself, shown by is widely used to assess bone mineral density  
the less bright signal in the intervertebral disc at this level. 

A B

Figure 15.62  MRI of cervical spine in a patient with transverse myelitis due to SLE (A) before and (B) after immunosuppression. 



308 15 Locomotor system ﻿
in metabolic bone disease and osteoporosis. 
Scans recorded with long intervals (e.g.  
every 2-3 years) between them may be used  
to assess the effects of therapy. Results are 
expressed in relation to a normal reference 
range.

■	 Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is 
becoming more widely available but remains 
expensive. This is a type of scintigraphic 
molecular imaging based mostly on the uptake 
of radiolabeled glucose by metabolically active 
structures. FDG-PET scans are mostly used in 
rheumatology investigations and have better 
signal-to-noise ratio than standard isotope bone 
scanning. The combined technology of CT and 
PET scanning allows the acquisition of 
structural information simultaneously with 
metabolic activity. It is extremely sensitive in 
detecting malignancy and is also proving useful 
in documenting large vessel inflammation in 
disorders such as Takayasu’s arteritis and giant 

Figure 15.63  Technetium bone scan in a distance runner, cell arteritis. The radiation exposure is 
showing focally increased uptake in the lower tibia owing to a considerable and as such this imaging modality 
stress fracture. should be used cautiously and appropriately.



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Nervous system 16 
Rodney W.H. Walker

Introduction The neurological history
In recent years there have been impressive advances The essentials of history taking have been covered 
throughout the field of neurology – in delineating elsewhere, but there are some points particularly 
disease entities and understanding their aetiology and salient to neurological conditions. The repertoire of 
pathogenesis; in diagnostic methods, particularly neurological symptoms is actually quite limited, 
imaging and genetic testing; and in treatment and although perhaps larger than that of other specialties. 
management. However, in spite of advances in Box 16.1 lists the usual ones, and each should be 
investigations, careful clinical assessment remains of specifically enquired about in taking a neurological 
central importance. history.

The fundamental importance of the clinical history The time course of evolution and sometimes resolu-
and examination cannot be overemphasized. In the tion of neurological symptoms very frequently 
diagnosis of neurological disease it is the history, indicates the nature of the problem, and so this needs 
rather than the examination, that is paramount, so to be clarified as precisely as possible. Thus, sensory 
it is even more important for this to be comprehensive. or motor symptoms which start abruptly and are at 
History taking has not changed significantly, but their most marked at or very soon after their onset 
clinical neurological examination continues to evolve. strongly suggest a vascular causation (transient 
Significant contributions have come from clinical ischaemia or ischaemic or haemorrhagic stroke). In 
assessment scales, some of which have been so suc- contrast, similar symptoms evolving over a few days, 
cessful as to have become internationally institutional- reaching a plateau in severity and then slowly receding 
ized, for example the Glasgow Coma Scale and the typify inflammatory central nervous system (CNS) 
Mini-Mental State Examination (although the latter demyelination (a first episode or a relapse of multiple 
has recently been patented). On the other hand sclerosis). Subacute (developing over weeks to 
clinical signs of limited sensitivity, specificity, reliability months), progressive symptoms can be caused by 
and localizing value can be dispensed with. many kinds of pathology, but neoplasia is always a 

A thorough neurological examination does involve prime concern.
doing more than is the case for other systems. Some These statements are true enough to be clinically 
basic neuroanatomical knowledge is necessary, but useful, although there are exceptions. For example, 
most clinical neurology need not be daunting. In new one of the reasons for requesting cranial imaging in 
patients presenting for diagnosis, a sensible formulation all stroke patients is to exclude a benign or malignant 
of the nature of the problem on the basis of the tumour or other pathology which has caused a stroke-
history and examination is critical in order to request like presentation. Neurodegenerative conditions always 
appropriate investigations, should they be necessary. develop insidiously with gradual progression, but 
Modern imaging undoubtedly has been the biggest occasionally patients present acutely. For example, 
revolution in clinical neurology in recent years, but motor neuron disease can present acutely with ventila-
injudicious use of imaging frequently leads to confu- tory failure. Alzheimer’s disease commonly becomes 
sion, delay in diagnosis and sometimes harm. Similar evident after an episode of acute delirium caused by 
considerations apply to the other major investigational an intercurrent illness.
modalities. Two common neurological presentations require a 

This chapter will discuss some aspects of neurologi- history not only from the patient but also, if at all 
cal history, concentrate on neurological examination possible, from others: attacks of loss of consciousness 
and the formulation of the nature of the neurological and memory impairment.
diagnosis and include some remarks on neurological The three most common causes of attacks of 
investigations. Not covered in this chapter are coma, reduced consciousness or awareness that lead to 
delirium and dementia. neurological consultations are neurocardiogenic 



310 16 Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.1  Points which help to distinguish syncope from seizures involving loss of consciousness. Minor injury, incontinence 
and sleepiness after the event do not distinguish well.
Syncope Seizure
In neurocardiogenic syncope, characteristic prodromal features The symptoms of focal seizure activity which precede 
include: tinnitus, muffled hearing, dimming of vision, loss of a secondarily generalized attack may or may not be 
vision while still conscious, widespread altered sensation, remembered after the attack is over
dizziness (may be described as spinning), lightheadedness, Usually little or no pallor
feeling of impending faint, weakness Vocalization at onset of generalized convulsion (GC)
Marked pallor Apnoea
Sweating (but not in those with autonomic failure) Cyanosis associated with GC
Any convulsion is brief (seconds) Stertorous breathing
Rapid recovery of lucidity and memory (registration and recall) Tongue biting
Patient comes round on the ground where he fell Postictal amnesia – paramedical staff present when 
A second attack immediately on being sat up after the first patient ‘comes round’, or patient ‘comes round’ in 
attack is very suggestive of neurocardiogenic syncope hospital (although he walked to the ambulance)
Neurocardiogenic syncope is commonly set off by pain, 
squeamishness, gastrointestinal illness, public places indoors 
(clubs, restaurants, trains), prolonged standing

Box 16.1  Neurological symptoms syncope, epilepsy and psychogenic non-epileptic 
attacks. It is far more informative to hear a description 

■	 Cognitive symptoms, especially memory impairment from a witness than to request potentially misleading 
■	 Headache and inappropriate investigations. Obtaining the wit-
■	 Loss of awareness ness’s account may require a telephone call; this is 
■	 Loss of consciousness time well invested. Table 16.1 summarizes some 
■	 Alteration of perception, including déjà vu points which help to distinguish syncope from 
■	 Dizziness, vertigo seizures.
■	 Loss of balance Memory impairment is a common complaint. 
■	 Falls Distinguishing between the worried, but well, and 
■	 Loss of sense of smell those with real impairment is greatly facilitated by 
■	 Loss of taste information provided by close family or other inform-
■	 Loss of vision ants. In general, if a patient is brought to a doctor 
■	 ‘Positive’ visual symptoms, including components of by a relative who complains that the patient has 

migraine auras, unformed and formed hallucinations memory impairment, there is most often an organic 
■	 Double vision disorder, usually dementia. In contrast, many but not 
■	 More than double vision (polyopia, palinopsia) all patients who come to a doctor by themselves with 
■	 Oscillopsia (a visual sensation of stationary objects the same complaint have good cognitive function. 

swaying back and forth) Furthermore, it is the relative who can report on 
■	 Deafness changes in personality, behaviour, self-care and capacity 
■	 Tinnitus which may be crucial to the diagnosis.
■	 Difficulty with speech The most frequent symptom leading to neuro-
■	 Difficulty swallowing logical referral is headache. It is also a common 
■	 Weakness reason for attending an emergency department. The 
■	 Abnormal movements of muscles (including cramp, vast majority of headaches are not caused by life-

fasciculations) threatening disorders such as aneurysmal subarachnoid 
■	 Abnormal movements of parts of the body (including haemorrhage, meningitis or brain tumour, but are 

tremor, dystonia, myoclonus) caused by common primary headache syndromes, 
■	 Clumsiness particularly migraine. Table 16.2 outlines some of the 
■	 Impairment of control of limbs features which may help to distinguish headaches of 
■	 Altered sensation different sorts.
■	 Loss of sensation Vertigo (a hallucination of movement) is an 
■	 Pain important symptom and requires careful characteriza-
■	 Symptoms of postural hypotension tion. It indicates a disorder of one or both labyrinths, 
■	 Impairment of sexual function vestibular nerves, vestibular nuclei in the brainstem 
■	 Impairment of bladder control or, rarely, the cerebrum. A clear-cut description of a 
■	 Impairment of bowel control spinning feeling usually signifies true vertigo. Patients 



SECTION Three
311

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.2  Headaches: points to consider in the history
Aspect of history Feature Diagnosis
Region/location Focal, retro-orbital Cluster headache

Migraine
Retro-orbital lesion

Focal, frontal Sinus pathology
Occipital Chiari malformation/cerebellar tonsillar ectopia

Intracranial hypotension
Cervical spondylosis
Occipital neuralgia
Migraine

Unilateral Migraine
Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania (CPH)
Hemicrania continua

Generalized Migraine
Tension-type headache

Temporal aspects >50% of days Chronic daily headache (chronic migraine; tension-type 
headache)

Attacks of hours/days Migraine
Attacks of up to 1 hour Cluster headache
Many attacks, lasting minutes CPH
Attacks of seconds Trigeminal neuralgia
Worse on waking Raised intracranial pressure

Sleep apnoea
New, acute/subacute onset Meningitis

Abscess
Encephalitis

Explosive onset, severe Subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH)
Character and Tight band around head, bland, Tension-type headache
severity featureless, not very severe

Throbbing, moderately severe Migraine
Extremely severe, constant Cluster headache
Severe, stabbing, lancinating Trigeminal neuralgia

Provoking/ Provoked by alcohol Migraine
relieving factors Cluster headache

Occur at night, start in sleep Migraine
Cluster headache
Hypnic headache

Relieved by sleep Migraine
Triggered by touching or moving the Trigeminal neuralgia
face
Caused by cough Chiari malformation

Idiopathic cough headache
Exertion Exacerbates migraine

Benign exertional headache
Orgasm Benign coital headache (SAH has to be excluded in a severe 

single attack)
Continued



312 16 Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.2  Continued
Aspect of history Feature Diagnosis
Associated Nausea, vomiting, photophobia, Migraine
symptoms phonophobia

Migraine aura (visual, sensory, etc.) Migraine
Neck stiffness, photophobia, Meningitis
vomiting, symptoms of fever
Tear production ipsilateral to a Migraine
unilateral headache Cluster headache

SUNCT*
Ipsilateral conjunctival injection Cluster headache

SUNCT*
Visual obscurations Raised intracranial pressure with papilloedema
Persistent focal neurological Intracranial lesion
symptoms

General health Indications of systemic neoplasia Metastasis
Polymyalgia and weight loss Giant cell arteritis

*SUNCT, short-lasting, unilateral, neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (a rare disorder).

are more likely to complain of dizziness or giddiness ‘pins and needles’, pain). In ordinary usage, the word 
than vertigo, and both dizziness and giddiness mean numb would seem to be unambiguous, but some 
different things to different patients, including vertigo, patients who are weak without sensory loss refer to 
oscillopsia (a visual sensation that stationary objects numbness (particularly in Bell’s palsy) and, conversely, 
are swaying back and forth), lightheadedness, loss of patients with sensory migraine auras may be mis
balance or even sometimes headache. It is always diagnosed as having hemiplegic migraine because of 
important to establish whether a patient with vertigo their impression of paralysis even though they can 
has positional vertigo. Enquiring whether the patient’s move the affected limbs. Patients who seem imprecise 
symptom is provoked by sitting from a lying position have some justification; the Shorter Oxford Dictionary 
or standing from a sitting position will not distinguish defines numb as ‘deprived of feeling, or of the power 
vertigo from postural hypotension or ataxia, as all of movement’ so it is important to clarify exactly 
give rise to symptoms on rising. Symptoms brought what the patient is describing.
on by lying down or turning over in bed or looking As a rule, transient ischaemic attacks which involve 
up at a high shelf or the sky more certainly signify the parietal cortex give rise to brief negative sensory 
real positional vertigo. It is not uncommon for patients symptoms. Conversely, focal sensory seizures are 
with loss of balance to complain of dizziness; such characterized by positive sensory symptoms.
patients will spontaneously comment that they feel Most organic neurological disorders which give rise 
secure sitting in a chair but dizzy as soon as they to sensory symptoms involve structural or functional 
stand up and move around. damage to nerves somewhere, whether it be in 

Focal weakness is self-explanatory. Many patients peripheral nerves, nerve roots, spinal cord or brain. 
complain of feeling generally weak when they have Hypersensitivity (hyperaesthesia) to all modalities of 
no loss of muscle strength at all. Some patients become sensation is therefore improbable or impossible. 
weak without realizing it. Thus, patients with unilateral Patients who appear to have very sensitive skin as a 
or bilateral quadriceps weakness may present with result of a lesion (e.g. herpes zoster radiculitis) have 
falls rather than complain of weakness. Patients with combinations of paraesthesia, hypoaesthesia, dysaes-
bilateral ankle dorsiflexion weakness may complain thesia, allodynia, hyperalgesia and hyperpathia. Some 
of being off balance or of tripping rather than weakness. of these terms are not without their ambiguities. 
Exertional weakness or worsening of weakness is Table 16.3 provides a definition for each.
characteristic of neuromuscular junction disorders but Lhermitte’s symptom (often called Lhermitte’s 
also occurs in cauda equina compression (spinal canal sign) is a paroxysm of positive sensory symptoms – an 
stenosis), spinal cord compression (cervical spondylotic electric shock feeling or a shower of paraesthesiae 
myelopathy) and in multiple sclerosis and sometimes shooting down the spine and/or into the upper or 
other disorders, so it is not specific but can be diagnosti- lower limbs triggered by neck flexion. It is indicative 
cally helpful and so should be asked about. of a cervical spinal cord lesion, commonly a multiple 

Sensory symptoms may be negative (a reduction sclerosis plaque, although other cord lesions (e.g. 
or absence of normal sensation) or positive (an spondylotic cord compression) and even cobalamin 
abnormal sensation which is felt, e.g. buzzing, tingling, deficiency may also produce this symptom.



SECTION Three
313

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.3  Nomenclature of cutaneous sensory symptoms routine neurological examination for such patients 
should include assessments of vision, the cranial 

Hypoaesthesia Reduced cutaneous sensation of any nerves, motor and sensory examination and examina-
modality tion of gait. Bear in mind that many patients with 

Paraesthesia Spontaneous abnormal sensation early cognitive impairment are adept at concealing 
including, tingling, pins and needles it, so that without probing, it can be missed.
and pain For most patients, it is best to be systematic with 

Neuralgia Pain in the distribution of a nerve or regard to neurological examination, adhering to a 
nerve root routine well rehearsed by the examiner and familiar 

Dysaesthesia An abnormal perception of a sensory to those with whom the examiner will communicate. 
stimulus, e.g. touch causes tingling or Thus, even if the patient’s problem is foot drop, it is 
pain entirely valid to start with examination of cranial 

Allodynia Pain caused by a stimulus that does nerves but sensible to explain to the patient that you 
not normally cause pain are going to start at the top and work down. Certain 

Hyperalgesia An abnormally intense perception of a situations require flexibility; patients with any degree 
mildly painful stimulus of impairment of consciousness need assessment of 

their delirium or coma from the outset. In patients 
Hyperpathia Perseveration, augmentation and, on presenting with cognitive impairment, it is best to 

occasion, spread of pain start the examination with cognitive assessment. It 
The pain threshold is normal or is important in all neurological patients to pay atten-
sometimes high tion to and document mobility, and in patients present-
The threshold for perceiving pain may ing with a gait disorder it is appropriate to examine 
be raised and there may be delay in the gait first. For most other patients, an appropriate 
perceiving a painful stimulus, but order of examination is cranial nerves, speech if 
once perceived, the pain is severe and necessary, motor system, sensory system and gait, 
prolonged and may spread followed by cognitive testing if relevant.

Hyperaesthesia An ambiguous term, best avoided

Cranial nerve examination
Neurological examination is poor at identifying Examination of the 12 cranial nerves actually involves 

and characterizing disorders of the autonomic nervous an assessment of much more than just the nerves 
system, making it particularly important that auto- and nuclei, particularly with respect to the sensory 
nomic function (including bladder and bowel control visual system and eye movements. The naming and 
and sexual function) is addressed in the history. numbering of cranial nerves and their nuclei is in 

some measure idiosyncratic and confusing; for 
example, there is no olfactory nerve as such and the 

The neurological examination eighth cranial nerve is actually two nerves, as is the 
seventh. Within the brainstem, trigeminal sensory 

Aspects of neurological examination can start from nuclei receive fibres not just from the fifth cranial 
the moment the patient is first encountered, before nerve but also from the seventh, ninth and tenth 
and during the taking of the history, such as noting nerves.
an abnormality of gait, difficulties with speech, 
parkinsonism or a hyperkinetic movement disorder. The olfactory (I) nerves
There is no such thing as a comprehensive neurological 
examination – it would take hours or days. However, Olfactory receptor cells are bipolar sensory neurons 
too many patients without neurological symptoms situated under the nasal epithelium. Their central 
have no neurological examination at all, which on axons project in numerous bundles, not as a discrete 
occasions proves regrettable. Consider, for instance, nerve, up through the cribriform plate of the skull 
the case of a man who develops areflexic weakness into the olfactory bulb on the inferior surface of the 
some days after a hernia operation. How helpful frontal lobe. These project via the olfactory tract to 
would it be to know that the reflexes had been normal parts of the temporal lobe and frontal lobe.
at the time of preoperative clinical clerking? A sug-
gested minimal neurological examination for non- Examination of the olfactory nerves
neurological patients would be assessments of the For ordinary clinical purposes, olfaction is tested using 
binocular visual fields, the eye movements, the biceps, a small number of bottles containing either a fragrant 
triceps, knee and ankle reflexes, the plantar reflexes or pungent smelling substance such as lemon, clove 
and funduscopy. Most patients attending for a neu- or asafoetida. Each nostril should be tested separately. 
rological consultation (with problems such as headache A necessary precondition is that a rhinological disorder 
or epilepsy) have no neurological signs. A minimal does not preclude the test. Ideally the patient should 



314 16 Nervous system ﻿
identify the smell rather than just report that it can gland just behind the optic chiasm, between the optic 
be smelt. There is little value in routinely testing tracts. Sensory afferents from all points of the retina 
olfaction; it is uncommon to detect an abnormality run in the nerve-fibre layer on the inner surface of 
and even less common for an abnormality to con- the retina to enter the optic nerve at the optic disc. 
tribute to a diagnosis. A subfrontal tumour such as Fibres from the temporal retina (nasal visual half-field) 
a meningioma may cause unilateral anosmia, but are placed laterally while those from the nasal retina 
other features of the history and examination will (temporal visual half-field) are medial. Fibres from 
mandate the imaging which should establish that the upper half of the retina run in the upper half of 
diagnosis. Subfrontal meningiomas can cause bilateral the optic nerve. At the optic chiasm, fibres from the 
anosmia, so imaging is indicated in a patient presenting nasal half of the retina (temporal visual half-field) 
just with anosmia unless another cause is clearly cross (decussate) to the contralateral optic tract, while 
evident. Olfactory nerve fibres passing through the the fibres from the temporal half of the retina do 
cribriform plate are not uncommonly sheared as a not cross but proceed posteriorly into the ipsilateral 
result of head injury, frequently leading to permanent optic tract (Fig. 16.1). Starting within the chiasm 
bilateral anosmia. Anosmia is commonly neurode- and continuing further posteriorly within the optic 
generative, occurring particularly in Lewy body disease, tract, fibres which convey matching information from 
so its presence in a patient with parkinsonism increases each eye (i.e. homonymous fibres, representing 
the likelihood that the patient has idiopathic (Lewy equivalent parts in the temporal retina for one eye, 
body) Parkinson’s disease. Endocrinologists test olfac- nasal retina for the other eye) become aligned with 
tion when Kallman’s syndrome is suspected. each other. Thus, each optic nerve conveys information 

from its respective eye, but every part of the sensory 
The optic (II) nerves (see also Chapter 20) visual system behind the optic chiasm on each side 

deals with vision for the contralateral binocular visual 
The optic nerve runs from the back of the globe of half-field.
the eye to the apex of the orbit and into the skull The majority of optic tract fibres pass, via the lateral 
through the optic canal to the optic chiasm, where geniculate nucleus, to the occipital cortex. The lower 
it is joined by the optic nerve from the other eye. part of the visual radiation transmits visual information 
Directly above the optic chiasm is the hypothalamus. from the inferior temporal retina of the ipsilateral 
Directly below is the pituitary gland. The pituitary eye and inferior nasal retina of the other eye. A few 
stalk runs from the hypothalamus to the pituitary optic tract fibres pass via the superior colliculus to 

Visual field of Visual field of
left eye right eye Left Right

Hemifield
1

Macula
2

Lens

Retina 3a

2 1 Optic nerves
2 + 3b

3a 3b Optic chiasm

4 4
Optic tract

Lateral geniculate body 5

Optic radiation
6a

5 Peripheral vision
6b

7 Occipital cortex

Macular vision 7
6

Anatomy Visual fields

Figure 16.1  A diagram of the sensory visual pathways. Sites of lesions and the visual field defects they produce are shown. 1. Optic 
nerve lesion. 2. Optic chiasm lesion (bitemporal hemianopia). 3a or 3b. Uniocular nasal hemianopia (rare). 3a plus 3b. Binasal hemianopia 
(very rare). 4. Optic tract lesion (incongruous homonymous hemianopia). 5. Visual radiation (homonymous quadrantanopia or hemianopia). 
6a. Occipital cortex lesion sparing the occipital pole (homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing). 6b. Occipital pole lesion 
(homonymous paracentral hemiscotoma). 7. A bilateral occipital cortex lesion (homonymous altitudinal hemianopia). 



SECTION Three
315

Nervous system ﻿
the midbrain to mediate the afferent limb of the to look to either side. Hold your hands up one on 
pupillary light reflex via connections to the Edinger- each side at face level, with your hands about 1 m 
Westphal nuclei. apart and ask the patient whether he can see both 

hands. This simple test will detect a dense homony-
Visual acuity and colour vision mous hemianopia. Next ask the patient to look into 
Visual acuity is of neurological as well as ophthal- your eyes. Switch from hands held up to index fingers 
mological importance, since optic nerve disease may held up and move them up so that they are situated 
lead to any degree of loss of acuity. For ordinary in the right and left superior quadrants of vision. 
clinical neurological purposes, the acuities measured Instruct the patient to point at the finger which 
using the Snellen chart are adequate. Severe loss of wiggles. Getting the patient to point is better than 
acuity (less than 6/60, the top letter on the Snellen asking him to say whether it is the right or left finger 
chart) is documented as ability to count fingers at 1 which is moving – very many muddle left and right 
metre, ability to perceive hand movements, perception in this situation. First wiggle one finger, then the 
of light only and no perception of light. other, to check the integrity of the superior quadrants. 

Acquired unilateral loss of colour vision is a char- Failure of the patient to see one of the fingers wiggling 
acteristic feature of optic neuropathy, and loss of suggests a homonymous quadrantanopia. If that 
colour vision can occur when visual acuity is well happens, carry on wiggling the finger which has not 
preserved. Thus, testing colour vision using Ishihara been registered by the patient and move it first across 
plates may be a sensitive bedside test for mild optic the midline to make sure that it becomes visible at 
neuropathy. the midline and then go back and do the same, this 

time moving the finger down into the inferior quad-
Visual fields rant, where the finger will be visible if the patient 
Assessment of the visual fields is a key part of the has a quadrantanopia or remain unseen if the patient 
neurological examination and need not take very long has a homonymous hemianopia. If the patient sees 
to perform. Field defects of importance are commonly each finger wiggling consecutively in each of the 
missed because they have not been looked for ade- upper quadrants, then wiggle both fingers simultane-
quately. Increasingly, opticians measure visual fields, ously and ask the patient what is happening. If the 
but it cannot always be assumed that a recent patient only sees the wiggling of the finger on one 
ophthalmological assessment will have included the side consistently, then he has visual inattention – an 
visual fields. occipitotemporal or occipitoparietal disorder. Having 

Visual field defects in one eye indicate a retinal or tested the superior quadrants, move down to the 
optic nerve disorder. They may affect any part of the inferior quadrants to test them in the same way. With 
field of the affected eye or nerve. Lesions at the optic a cooperative patient, all of this takes only a matter 
chiasm or lesions behind the chiasm in the optic of seconds to do. The technique described will not 
tracts, visual radiations or occipital cortex give rise detect a bitemporal hemianopia, optic nerve lesions 
to visual field defects affecting both eyes. Unilateral or retinal disorders; these require testing of the field 
retrochiasmal lesions give rise to field defects affecting for each eye separately.
the contralateral binocular half-field, and the defects The best way to test the monocular visual fields at 
are homonymous (i.e. they affect equivalent parts of the bedside is to use a pin with a bright red pinhead 
the temporal half-field of one eye and the nasal of about 5-8 mm diameter. The patient needs to be 
half-field of the other). Congruity refers to the extent positioned such that light is not shining from behind 
to which the defects in the two half-fields match the examiner into the patient’s eyes, so as to interfere 
each other exactly. A congruous homonymous with his ability to see the colour of the pinhead. The 
hemianopia indicates a lesion in the occipital cortex, margin of the field is defined by the points at which 
while a non-congruous homonymous hemianopia is perception of the colour of the pinhead changes from 
more likely to occur with an optic tract lesion. black to red. Ask the patient to cover one eye with 

When ophthalmologists do visual field testing, the palm of his hand (or cover the eye with your own 
they tend to do Goldman perimetry or to obtain hand) and then to look with his open eye straight into 
automated Humphrey fields, and the results of these your own confronting eye (his left into your right and 
tests are very useful, but in the clinic or on the ward, vice versa). First, put the pinhead into the middle of 
neurologists and general physicians test visual fields the visual field and check that the patient sees it as 
by simple confrontation field testing, comparing the bright red. Swap to the other eye and compare the 
patient’s fields with their own, assuming their own perceived brightness of red reported by the patient 
to be normal. for his two eyes. Loss of perceived redness in one eye 

(red desaturation) raises the possibility of a mild optic 
Examination of the visual fields neuropathy. A patient who is already known to have 
It is best to start by testing the binocular visual fields poor acuity in one eye may have a central scotoma, 
(i.e. the patient and examiner both have both eyes in which case the pinhead will either not be seen in 
open). Start by asking the patient to look at your the centre of the field or will be perceived black. A 
face. Ensure that he avoids the common temptation small central scotoma can be defined by moving the 



316 16 Nervous system ﻿
pinhead outwards in four different directions until the sinus and from there through the orbit to the pupil. 
patient sees its redness. Next, put the pinhead into There is also sympathetic innervation of the levator 
each of the four quadrants of vision close to the centre palpebrae superioris muscle by the same route. A 
and check that the patient sees it as bright red. This lesion of the sympathetic supply to the pupil at any 
may detect a paracentral scotoma and is also a good point between the hypothalamus and the orbit will 
way of detecting temporal field defects due to optic give rise to the two main features of Horner’s syn-
chiasm lesions such as pituitary tumours. Then finally, drome: constriction of the pupil (which will still react 
while ensuring that the patient maintains fixation into to light by further constricting) and ptosis (drooping 
your eye, compare the periphery of his field with of the upper eyelid).
your own by moving the pin from outside the field 
in towards the centre at various points around the Examination of the pupils
periphery, with the pin midway between you and First, in normal illumination, establish whether the 
the patient. The patient has to report not when he pupils are of equal size. If they are not, bear in mind 
first sees the pin or your hand but when the pinhead that there are two possibilities: either one is smaller 
colour changes from black to red. than it should be or the other is bigger. Avoid jumping 

to the wrong conclusion.
The pupils Ideally, the reactions of the pupils to light should 
Examination of the pupils and their responses to be tested in moderately low illumination. Use a bright 
light and accommodation provides information not torch, not an ophthalmoscope. Shine the light into 
only about specific neurological syndromes which one eye and observe the response of the pupil (the 
affect the pupils, such as Adie’s syndrome, but also direct response), the normal response being constric-
information about the integrity of the anterior visual tion of the pupil which is sustained until the light is 
pathways (particularly the optic nerves), the brainstem removed. Repeat the test, this time looking at the 
and the efferent parasympathetic and sympathetic contralateral pupil, which will normally constrict (the 
pathways to the pupillary sphincter and dilator consensual response). Then test the other eye. Next, 
muscles, respectively. test accommodation (constriction of the pupils when 

Pupil constriction is a parasympathetic function. focusing on a near object). Ask the patient to look 
The first-order neurons are in the Edinger-Westphal into the distance, then at your finger held at a distance 
nucleus adjacent to the oculomotor nucleus in the and to keep looking as you advance your finger to a 
midbrain. Axons travel in the oculomotor nerve to distance of about 20 cm from the patient’s face. 
the ciliary ganglion in the orbit. Second-order neurons Advancing your finger in a wavy line allows you to 
innervate the pupillary sphincter. Lesions of the check that the patient is looking at the finger. Observe 
Edinger-Westphal nucleus or the pupilloconstrictor the adduction of the eyes and the constriction of 
nerve fibres in the oculomotor (third) cranial nerve the pupils. Then ask the patient to look into the 
or in the orbit lead to dilatation of the pupil (mydria- distance again.
sis) unless there is simultaneously a lesion of the 
sympathetic innervation of the pupil. In either case, Afferent pupillary defect
there is a failure of constriction of the pupil to light. A patient with a severe lesion of the anterior visual 
In general, compression of the third cranial nerve system in one eye (an ophthalmological disorder or 
(classically by a posterior communicating artery an optic nerve disorder such as severe optic neuritis 
aneurysm) affects the pupilloconstrictor fibres. A or an ischaemic optic neuropathy) will have an afferent 
microvascular ischaemic lesion of the third nerve pupillary defect (i.e. a failure of constriction of either 
may spare the pupilloconstrictor fibres, giving rise to pupil to light shone into the affected eye). If the 
a pupil-sparing third nerve lesion. Microvascular visual system on the other side is unaffected, light 
lesions of the oculomotor nucleus may spare the shone into the normal eye will lead to a normal direct 
Edinger–Westphal nucleus with the same result. A pupillary response and there will also be a consensual 
mid-sized unreactive pupil due to a lesion of both response in the visually impaired eye, assuming the 
parasympathetic and sympathetic supplies is seen in efferent pathway is intact.
aneurysms of the internal carotid artery within the 
cavernous sinus, along with other features of a cavern- Relative afferent pupillary defect
ous sinus syndrome. A patient with a mild lesion of the anterior visual 

Pupil dilation is achieved by sympathetic innervation apparatus on one side will exhibit a direct pupillary 
of pupillodilator muscle fibres. The first-order neurons response to light, but it will be less vigorous than the 
are in the hypothalamus. They project down through consensual response to light shone into the other eye. 
the brainstem and cervical spinal cord to the ciliospinal In this situation, the swinging torch test may reveal 
centre in the lower cervical and upper thoracic spinal a relative afferent pupillary defect. If a patient has 
cord, from where second-order neurons project via a mild optic nerve lesion in the left eye, then acuity 
the T1 nerve root and sympathetic chain to the and colour vision may be only mildly impaired and 
superior cervical ganglion. Third-order axons run up the field normal. Shine the torch into the affected 
the internal carotid artery as far as the cavernous left eye and note the seemingly normal response. 



SECTION Three
317

Nervous system ﻿
After 2 seconds, move the torch briskly to shine into Fundoscopy
the normal right eye. The right pupil will already be Fundoscopy is described in Chapter 20. The neurologi-
constricted as a result of the consensual response. It cal examination focuses on papilloedema, optic 
will stay constricted and, if anything, will constrict atrophy, pigmentary retinal degeneration and vascular 
a little further. After 2 seconds, move the torch disease.
briskly back to the left eye. Because of the subtle 
afferent defect, the signal strength of the input to 
the midbrain pupilloconstrictor (Edinger-Westphal) The oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV) and 
nuclei will be reduced, resulting in an apparently abducens (VI) nerves – eye movements
paradoxical dilation of the left pupil in spite of light Abnormalities of eye movements may result from 
being shone into it. If you keep swinging the torch disorders of the cerebral hemispheres; brainstem; 
back and forth from one eye to the other, the relative cerebellum; cranial nerves III, IV and VI; the 
afferent pupillary defect will continue to be observed, neuromuscular junctions between oculomotor nerves 
although the defect is best seen within the first few and eye muscles; the eye muscles themselves and 
attempts. from lesions affecting the structure and contents of 

Afferent and relative afferent pupillary defects are the orbits. Their importance in neurological and 
important because they are objective. A person who general physical examination is therefore evident.
gives the impression of having functional visual The nucleus for the third cranial nerve is in the 
impairment in one eye, but who has an afferent midbrain (Fig. 16.2). The nerve emerges ventrally 
pupillary defect, must have an organic problem. In (anteriorly), medial to the cerebral peduncle, passing 
contrast, a person who reports uniocular blindness forward through the cavernous sinus to the superior 
and has normal pupillary responses to light will not orbital fissure. In the orbit, the superior ramus sup-
be blind. plies superior rectus and levator palpebrae superioris. 

The inferior ramus supplies inferior rectus, inferior 
Efferent pupillary defect (part of a third cranial oblique and medial rectus, and parasympathetic 
nerve lesion) fibres from the inferior ramus pass to the ciliary 
A lesion of the pupilloconstrictor nerve fibres in ganglion and thence to the ciliary muscle and the 
the oculomotor nerve will lead to dilation of the pupil sphincter.
ipsilateral pupil (due to the unrestrained effect of The fourth nerve nucleus lies just caudal to the 
the intact sympathetic supply). Further, there will be third nerve nucleus in the brainstem. The nerve fibres 
failure of constriction of the pupil to light, although of the fourth nerve decussate. The nerve starts on 
the consensual response in the other eye will be the dorsal aspect of the brainstem and passes around 
preserved. Light shone into the contralateral eye will the brainstem through the cavernous sinus and 
elicit a normal direct response but no consensual 
response.

Other common pupillary abnormalities of Aqueduct
neurological relevance
■	 Simple (physiological) anisocoria (inequality of Posterolateral

pupil size): this is common. The pupillary territory
inequality is not marked and the reactions to 
light and accommodation are normal. III nerve nucleus

■	 Tonic pupil: this is seen in Holmes Adie 
syndrome, a relatively benign polyneuropathy Paramedian Spinothalamic

comprising a lesion of the ciliary ganglion and a territory tract

degree of loss of tendon reflexes. An acute Adie Medial
pupil is enlarged, does not react to light and lemniscus
there is a slow constriction to accommodation. 
Redilation of the pupil after accommodation is 
delayed such that, temporarily, the normal pupil 
may be larger than the affected one. Red

nucleus
■	 Argyll Robertson pupils: these are small, 

irregular, unequal pupils which do not react to 
light but do to accommodation. They were seen 
in advanced syphilis. Without the irregularity Basal Cerebral Substantia
but with the other features, diabetic small vessel territory peduncle nigra
disease is currently the most common cause. Figure 16.2  A diagram of the midbrain. Note the dorsally 

■	 The pupils in coma: this is important but positioned third nerve nuclei. Vascular territories are shown on  
covered elsewhere (Ch. 9). the left. 



318 16 Nervous system ﻿
Paramedian VI Cochlear Table 16.4  Actions of the eye muscles

vascular nucleus nucleus
territory Action

Posterolateral IV Medial V tract Vestibular With eye With eye 
vascular ventricle longitudinal and nuclei
territory fasciculus nucleus Nerve Muscle abducted adducted

Abducens; Lateral Abduction Abduction
VI rectus
Oculomotor; Inferior Depression Depression; 

Middle III rectus extorsion
cerebellar Oculomotor; Inferior Extorsion; Elevation

VII peduncle 
nucleus III oblique elevation

Oculomotor; Medial Adduction Adduction
III rectus
Oculomotor; Superior Elevation Elevation; 

Spinothalamic III rectus intorsion
tract Trochlear; Superior Intorsion; Depression

Basal VIIn
vascular VIn Medial Pontine motor IV oblique depression
territory lemniscus nuclei and fibres The eye is offset laterally in relation to the apex of the orbit which accounts for 

why the superior and inferior rectus muscles have only purely vertical actions 
Figure 16.3  A diagram of the fifth, sixth and seventh nerve when the eye is abducted. Adduction of the eye turns the superior and inferior 
nuclei in the pons. Note how the nerve fibres of VII loop round the oblique muscles into a pure depressor and elevator, respectively.
nucleus of VI. 

Terminology in eye movements
Horizontal movement of the eye outwards (laterally) 

Superior Inferior is termed abduction and inwards (medially) is termed 
rectus adduction. Vertical movement upwards is termed 

Right oblique Left elevation and downwards is depression. The eye is 
Lateral Medial also capable of diagonal movements (version) at any 
rectus rectus intermediate angle. Rotary movements are those in 

which the eye twists on its anterior–posterior axis. 
Inferior Superior Intorsion is rotation such that the upper part of the eye 
rectus oblique moves medially and the lower part of the eye moves 

laterally. Extorsion is the opposite. Convergence refers 
Figure 16.4  A diagram showing which muscles elevate and 
depress the abducted and adducted eye. to adduction of both eyes to fixate on a near object. 

Lateral rotation of the head causes reflex movement 
of the eyes in the opposite direction (adduction 
of one eye, abduction of the other). A squint (the 

superior orbital fissure to the superior oblique muscle. eyes point in different directions) is described as 
Consequent upon the decussation of fibres, the right convergent or divergent strabismus, depending on 
trochlear nucleus innervates the left superior oblique whether the eyes point towards or away from each 
and vice versa. other. Saccades are abrupt, rapid, small movements of 

The sixth nerve nucleus is beneath the floor of the both eyes, such as those needed to shift fixation from 
fourth ventricle in the pons (Fig. 16.3). Nerve fibres one object to another. Nystagmus denotes rhythmic 
run forward (ventrally) through the pons emerging oscillations of one or (more usually) both eyes. In 
at its lower border, then up the skull base and forward pendular nystagmus, the movement is slow in both 
through the cavernous sinus to the superior orbital directions. In jerk nystagmus, there is a slow phase in 
fissure and into the orbit to supply the lateral rectus one direction and a fast phase in the opposite direc-
muscle. The nerve is long, thin and very susceptible tion. By convention, the direction of nystagmus is the 
to dysfunction, most notably in the setting of raised direction of the fast phase, but the defect is in fact 
intracranial pressure of any aetiology, which may give the slow phase and is either an abnormal deviation of 
rise to either unilateral or bilateral sixth nerve lesions. the eyes or a failure of the eyes to maintain position, 
This is referred to as a ‘false localizing sign’, since a and the fast phase is a compensatory saccade aimed 
focal mass lesion causing raised intracranial pressure at restoring the correct position of the eyes. Some 
may be remote from the sixth nerves and their nuclei types of nystagmus are outlined below.
or there may be no focal cause of the raised pressure 
at all (e.g. idiopathic intracranial hypertension). Examination of eye movements

Table 16.4 and Fig. 16.4 outline the actions of each As with every other component of examination, the 
eye muscle. detail in which the eye movements are examined 



SECTION Three
319

Nervous system ﻿

A B

Figure 16.5  A severe right third nerve lesion with complete ptosis (A). With the paralysed eyelid raised, paresis of adduction is seen on 
attempted left gaze (B). In this patient the pupil is spared, as is commonly seen in ischaemic lesions but not in compressive lesions.  
The other features of a third nerve lesion are paresis of elevation of the eye and intorsion of the eye on attempting to look down, due to  
the action of the superior oblique muscle on an eye that cannot be adducted (reproduced from Forbes and Jackson, Color Atlas and  
Text of Clinical Medicine, Mosby, 2002).

depends on whether there are relevant symptoms inspection. In this situation, if the ophthalmoparesis 
and whether abnormal signs are likely to be present. affects just one eye, it is possible to work out which 
Ask the patient to keep his head still (assist him by eye muscles are underactive by diplopia testing. The 
putting your left hand on his head to steady it) and true image is that generated by the eye with normal 
then to look at your right index finger held directly movements. The false image is that generated by the 
in front of his eyes at about half a metre distance. In eye with the paretic muscle or muscles. For example, 
the primary position of gaze, look for any visible if a patient develops double vision on looking to the 
abnormality of the alignment of the two eyes (an right, with horizontal separation of the images, the 
affected patient may or may not complain of double false image will be the one further out to the right. 
vision) and any pendular or vestibular nystagmus This is true whether it is the right eye which does 
(see below). Now move your finger to the right, then not abduct adequately (right lateral rectus weakness) 
left, and then up and down. The pursuit eye move- or if it is the left eye which does not adduct adequately 
ments which are elicited should precisely follow your (left medial rectus weakness). If this does not seem 
finger at the appropriate constant velocity. Eye immediately clear, consider the extreme case: one 
movements which are ‘broken up’ into a series of eye moves, the other does not. An image (an exam-
short saccades indicate a brainstem or cerebellar iner’s finger or a white pinhead) moves to the patient’s 
lesion affecting eye movement control. Patients with right. The image remains in the middle of the field 
diplopia will usually experience their diplopia at of the eye which moves but moves progressively to 
some point (or at all times) during this simple test. the right of the field of the eye which does not. The 
However, in patients with a complaint of diplopia it same rule applies in all directions of gaze. Diplopia 
is important not just to test vertical eye movements is always maximal in the direction in which the weak 
from the primary position of gaze but to test move- muscle has its purest action (see Table 16.4).
ments to the right and up and down and then to the The severity of the diplopia should be assessed in 
left and up and down. During pursuit eye movement eight positions: looking to left and right, up and down, 
examination, gaze-evoked and vestibular nystagmus and obliquely up and down to the left and obliquely 
will be observable (see below). When looking for up and down to the right. To work out which muscle 
nystagmus, it is important not to get the patient to is underactive, where the diplopia is maximal, cover 
look too far in any direction since, at the extremes each eye in turn and get the patient to tell you which 
of gaze, nystagmus can be normal as the patient of the two images disappears. Inconsistent answers 
struggles to deviate his eyes beyond what is possible. are common, however, and the assistance of an 
Look for nystagmus at about 30° away from the ophthalmologist or optometrist is frequently desirable. 
primary position of gaze. The features of lesions of the third, fourth and sixth 

cranial nerves are summarized in Table 16.5.
Diplopia testing In assessing patients who have double vision, it is 
If a patient complains of double vision, first establish best first to establish which muscles appear to be 
that it is true diplopia and not monocular diplopia. weak and then try to decide what the nature of the 
In patients who have obvious, easily visible paresis problem is likely to be, taking into consideration all 
of movement of one or both eyes, the reason for the physical signs. Thus, impairment of eye movements 
diplopia is self-evident. in one eye in combination with proptosis of that eye 

Diplopia develops with even very subtle misalign- may occur because of mechanical restriction of eye 
ment of the eyes, which cannot be seen on simple movements by an intraorbital lesion. Weakness of 



320 16 Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.5  The effects of lesions of the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV) and abducens (VI) nerves
Affected nerve Signs Comment
Oculomotor* Paresis of adduction (medial rectus) The eye becomes abducted because of unopposed action of 

lateral rectus, and slightly depressed because of action of 
superior oblique

Paresis of elevation (superior rectus The pure depressor action of superior oblique cannot be tested 
and inferior oblique) because the eye cannot be adducted

Intorsion of the eye on attempted down gaze indicates intact 
trochlear nerve and superior oblique function

Paresis of depression (inferior rectus)
Ptosis due to paresis of levator With complete ptosis, there is of course no diplopia
palpebrae superioris
Dilated, unreactive pupil This feature is not present in pupil-sparing lesions 

(microvascular lesions of nucleus or nerve)
Trochlear Paresis of superior oblique Extorsion of the eye due to unopposed action of inferior oblique 

leads to diplopia such that a vertical line looks V-shaped
The patient compensates with a head tilt to the side opposite the 
lesion, intact intorsion on that side tending to correct the diplopia

Abducens Paresis of lateral rectus Horizontal diplopia
*Figure 16.5 shows a patient with a severe oculomotor palsy.

Box 16.2  Cranial nerve involvement in lesions of the large left cerebral hemisphere lesion may be associated 
cavernous sinus and superior orbital fissure with failure of right gaze and a tendency for the eyes 

to deviate to the left (the side of the lesion). Output 
1	 Lesion of the cavernous sinus (e.g. internal carotid runs to the right paramedian pontine reticular forma-

aneurysm, internal carotid artery dissection, tion (PPRF); hence, a right-sided pontine lesion may 
meningioma): involve a right gaze paresis. Output from the right 
–	 potential involvement of cranial nerves III, IV, VI, V1 PPRF goes to the right sixth nerve nucleus, resulting 

(ophthalmic division), V2 (maxillary division) and in right eye abduction, and across, via the left medial 
sympathetic pupillodilator nerve fibres longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), to the left third nerve 

–	 cavernous sinus thrombosis combines the above with nucleus, resulting in simultaneous left eye adduction. 
proptosis, chemosis, papilloedema and visual failure Attempted right gaze in the setting of a left MLF 

2	 Lesion of the superior orbital fissure (e.g. Tolosa Hunt lesion results in abduction of the right eye but failure 
syndrome): of adduction of the left eye – an internuclear oph-
–	 potential involvement of III, IV, VI and V1 (ophthalmic thalmoparesis (INO) (see Fig. 16.6). Bilateral MLF 

division) lesions give rise to bilateral INO, in which case, with 
–	 extension into the orbit may lead to involvement of lateral gaze in either direction, only the abducting 

the optic nerve eye moves normally. Nystagmus is commonly seen 
in the abducting eye. The pathway for adducting 
both eyes for near vision is separate and sometimes 

muscles in both eyes with different patterns of in bilateral INO, preservation of adduction of the 
involvement of the muscles in the two eyes is likely eyes for near vision (convergence) can be demon-
to be due to a disorder of the muscles themselves strated, proving that the problem is not bilateral 
(orbital myositis, thyroid eye disease) or due to ocular medial rectus weakness.
or generalized myasthenia. The pupils will not be 
involved. Bilateral, asymmetrical combinations of Vertical gaze pareses
cranial nerve lesions are relatively uncommon (neo- The neural control of upgaze and downgaze is 
plastic infiltration, cranial polyneuritis). Bilateral sixth complex. Ultimately, output for upgaze is via com-
cranial nerve lesions are common, usually but not ponents of the third nerve nucleus mainly to the 
exclusively as a feature of raised intracranial pressure. superior rectus and inferior oblique muscles bilaterally. 
Multiple oculomotor neuropathies in one eye direct The output for downgaze is from the third and fourth 
attention to the superior orbital fissure and the cavern- nerve nuclei to the inferior rectus and superior oblique 
ous sinus (see Box 16.2). muscles, respectively. In general, defects of upgaze 

or downgaze localize rather poorly, but lesions such 
Horizontal gaze paresis; internuclear as pineal tumours which compress the midbrain and 
ophthalmoparesis bilateral descending connections from the hemispheres 
Neural control of voluntary lateral gaze to the right often cause upgaze paresis. Rare midbrain ischaemic 
starts in the left cerebral hemisphere, such that a strokes due to occlusion of a perforating vessel from 



SECTION Three
321

Nervous system ﻿
at it. Then close that fist and open the other and ask 

Attempted lateral gaze to left the patient to switch his gaze to the hand at the side. 
Right Left By alternating which hand is open you can get the 

patient to refixate briskly to and fro. Then check the 
other side. These manoeuvres test saccadic movements; 
in disease, saccades may be slowed or interrupted. A 

Weak adduction Nystagmus mild INO will be best seen during saccadic horizontal 
A eye movements. Because detecting a mild INO 

requires observing a difference in the velocity of 
movement of the two eyes, it is difficult to appreciate 

Command if the examiner fixates on one or the other eye; 
R L perhaps, unintuitively, it is best to look at the bridge 

of the patient’s nose to see the movement of the two 
eyes at the same time.

III
1

Medial Supranuclear gaze pareses
rectus Reflex eye movements related to head movements 

PPRF are generated and organized by vestibular, cerebellar 
MLF and brainstem systems, whereas voluntary gaze is 

3 initiated in the cerebral hemispheres. A patient’s gaze 
2 paresis is therefore supranuclear if reflex eye move-

ments are intact. Take a patient with selective paresis 
VI of downgaze. If brisk backward rotation of the head 

NPH (extension of the neck) produced reflex depression 
Vestibular of both eyes, a supranuclear lesion would be inferred. 

nuclei Lateral In practice, this is often not easily achieved since the 
B rectus relatively common disorder giving supranuclear 

Figure 16.6  (A) A right internuclear ophthalmoparesis. (B) A downgaze paresis is progressive supranuclear palsy, 
diagram of the pathways for horizontal gaze. The command for left a condition in which there is also axial rigidity affect-
gaze originates in the right cerebral hemisphere. Descending nerve ing neck movements.
fibres decussate to reach the left pons. Lesion 1 produces a left 
horizontal gaze paresis. Lesion 2 produces a right internuclear Peripheral vestibular nystagmus
ophthalmoparesis. Lesion 3 produces the ‘one and a half’ This occurs in lesions of the labyrinth or vestibular 
syndrome: a left gaze paresis and left internuclear nerve. Normally there is tonic input to the brainstem 
ophthalmoparesis (failure of adduction of the left eye on right vestibular nuclei from the periphery. Loss of this 
gaze) – only abduction of the right eye on right gaze remains. 
NPH, nucleus prepositus hypoglossi; MLF, medial longitudinal tonic input leads to deviation of the eyes towards the 
fasciculus; PPRF, paramedian pontine reticular formation. affected side (slow phase) with fast-phase nystagmus 

directed to the opposite side. In mild lesions, the 
nystagmus is only seen when the eyes look in the 
direction of the fast phase. In more severe lesions, 
the nystagmus is seen with the eyes in the primary 

the top of the basilar artery include downgaze paresis position of gaze or even when looking away from the 
among the clinical manifestations. direction of the fast phase. Usually the nystagmus 

is of high frequency and relatively low amplitude.
Non-paralytic strabismus
Clinicians need to be able to recognize developmental Gaze paretic nystagmus
non-paralytic strabismus. Decompensation of a long- Gaze paretic nystagmus is a gaze-evoked nystagmus 
standing squint may be a cause of acquired diplopia. in which the eyes are not able to maintain a position 

away from their primary position, so the slow phase 
Testing saccadic eye movements is a drift back to the primary position while the fast 
Getting a patient to follow a moving finger tests phase is in the direction of gaze. In the primary 
pursuit eye movements. It takes very little time to position, the eyes are still. The nystagmus may be of 
test saccadic eye movements and useful signs may large amplitude and low frequency. Drug-induced 
be detected. First, simply ask the patient to keep his nystagmus (alcohol, benzodiazepines, antiepileptic 
head still and look to the left, to the right, up and medication) is of this sort and is seen in all directions 
down. Then hold your hands up in front of the patient, of gaze. Structural brainstem or cerebellar lesions 
one in the primary position of gaze, the other to the may cause asymmetric gaze paretic nystagmus. In 
side, with palms facing the patient, fists closed. Ask cerebellar hemisphere lesions, the nystagmus may be 
the patient to keep his head still. Open the fist of unidirectional with the fast phase towards the side 
the hand in front of the patient and ask him to look of the lesion.



322 16 Nervous system ﻿
Upbeat nystagmus (fast phase upwards) may occur the trigeminal nerve: ophthalmic (V1), maxillary 

with lesions at various locations in the brainstem and (V2) and mandibular (V3). These nerves also mediate 
with cerebellar vermis lesions. Downbeat nystagmus general sensation inside the mouth and nose and 
is characteristic of cervicomedullary junction lesions proprioception. The ophthalmic nerve passes through 
such as Chiari malformations but can also be seen the cavernous sinus and superior orbital fissure. The 
with cerebellar degenerations. maxillary nerve also passes through the cavernous 

sinus but leaves the inside of the skull through the 
Congenital nystagmus foramen rotundum. The mandibular nerve passes 
The rule here is that the nystagmus is horizontal, through the foramen ovale.
even when the patient looks up or down. On left Afferents mediating touch sensation pass to the 
gaze, it is left beating, and on right gaze, it is right principal sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in 
beating. There may be a null point at which the the pons. Pain and temperature afferents go into the 
nystagmus is least conspicuous, but it is not necessarily spinal tract and pass caudally into the medulla and 
in the primary position, and the eyes may not be into the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, which 
completely still. Congenital nystagmus is damped by extends down from the medulla as low as the upper 
convergence. cervical spinal cord. Thus, lesions in the medulla can 

give rise to dissociated sensory loss in trigeminal 
Pendular nystagmus territory (loss of pinprick sensation with preserved 
This may be seen as a complication of congenital or light touch sensation).
acquired very poor vision. It is also seen in pontine 
lesions (e.g. multiple sclerosis). Motor component of the trigeminal nerve

Motor nerve fibres from the motor nucleus in the 
The trigeminal (V) nerve pons run in the motor root of the trigeminal nerve, 
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed motor and sensory bypassing the trigeminal ganglion to enter the man-
nerve. The nerve trunk emerges from the pons as dibular nerve. They supply the muscles of mastication: 
sensory and motor roots. masseter, temporalis and the lateral pterygoids.

Sensory component of the trigeminal nerve Trigeminal territory sensory loss
Patients with impaired sensation on one side of the 

The primary sensory neurons are in the trigeminal face may have a trigeminal nerve lesion, a trigeminal 
ganglion, just behind the cavernous sinus at the nucleus lesion or a lesion of central trigeminal sensory 
apex of the petrous bone. Central projections run pathways. Not uncommonly, unilateral facial sensory 
in the trigeminal nerve into the pons. Fig. 16.7 shows symptoms remain unexplained, which does not 
the cutaneous distribution of the three divisions of necessarily make them ‘non-organic’. Much is made 

of distinguishing between patients whose distribution 
of sensory loss is anatomical and those in whom it 
is not. Sensory loss which ends at the jaw line and 
at the hairline would be regarded as non-anatomical 
but too much dogma may be unwise – patients are 

Ophthalmic often not very careful reporters of exactly where 
their sensory symptoms are. Clearly defined symptoms 

C2 of reduced sensation render examination almost 
Trigeminal redundant, but the area of hypoaesthesia can be 

delineated in the same way as sensory loss anywhere 
else using a pin and testing from a numb area outwards 
towards where sensation is normal.

Maxillary The corneal reflex
A sensory stimulus applied to the cornea causes a 
reflex blink which cannot be suppressed; its absence 

Mandibular on one side establishes unequivocally the presence 
of a trigeminal lesion. Patients with an anaesthetic 
cornea are at risk of corneal injury, so it is important 

C3 to identify affected individuals by testing patients 
C4 who very clearly have symptoms and other signs of a 

trigeminal lesion. It is also an important test in coma. 
The test is uncomfortable and should not be part of 

Figure 16.7  Areas of cutaneous innervation of the head and a ‘routine’ neurological examination. The presence of 
neck by the three divisions of the trigeminal nerve and the upper a normal corneal reflex does not mean that there is 
cervical nerve roots. no lesion of the trigeminal nerve or its connections.



SECTION Three
323

Nervous system ﻿
Explain to the patient what is going to happen. membrane, external auditory meatus and tragus of 

Ask him to look in such a direction that the eyes are the ear. This accounts for the herpetic vesicles seen 
wide open. Using the corner of a clean tissue, touch in the ear in patients with the Ramsay Hunt syndrome 
the centre of the patient’s cornea, approaching from of facial paralysis caused by herpes zoster affecting 
the side. The normal response is a brisk blink. Some the facial nerve.
use cotton wool, but there is a risk of strands getting Secretomotor parasympathetic efferents leave the 
stuck in the eye because of the blink. In coma, a drop pontomedullary junction in the nervus intermedius 
of saline applied to the cornea is a good stimulus. which joins the facial nerve in the internal audi-
Remember that if there is ipsilateral facial paralysis tory meatus. Some of the parasympathetic nerves 
(e.g. Bell’s palsy), the reflex will be absent on leave the facial nerve at the geniculate ganglion 
the affected side, but will be readily seen on the in the greater petrosal nerve, eventually mediating 
other side. tear secretion from the lachrymal glands. Others 

leave via the chorda tympani nerve to reach salivary 
Testing the motor component of the  glands.
trigeminal nerve These complexities are relevant to clinical neurology 
Look for wasting of the temporalis and masseter because a facial nerve lesion, depending on its location, 
muscles. Feel for contraction of the masseter muscles may be associated with loss of taste, hyperacusis (if 
when the patient clenches his jaw. Ask the patient the stapedius is paralysed) and, in chronic lesions, 
to open his mouth; the lateral pterygoid muscles on ‘crocodile tears’ (i.e. inappropriate tear production 
each side draw the mandible forward, such that a when salivary glands should be activated), attributed 
severe lesion of the trigeminal nerve will lead to to aberrant reinnervation of salivary and lachrymal 
deviation of the jaw towards the side of the lesion glands.
due to weakness of the pterygoid muscles on the Facial weakness occurs because of muscle disorders 
affected side. The pterygoid muscles may be further (invariably bilateral weakness), myasthenia (invariably 
tested by asking the patient to push his open jaw bilateral but may be asymmetric early on), polyneu-
sideways against your hand. ropathies (e.g. Guillain-Barré syndrome or vasculitis, 

unilateral or bilateral), facial nerve or nuclear lesions 
The facial (VII) nerve (most commonly unilateral), motor neuronopathies 

(usually bilateral) or upper motor neuron disorders 
The facial nerve is principally a motor nerve, supplying (usually unilateral, but occasionally bilateral).
facial muscles on one side, but it also has small general A lower motor neuron lesion affecting the whole 
somatic sensory and major gustatory sensory com- of the facial nerve nucleus or the whole of the facial 
ponents, as well as important parasympathetic nerve will cause weakness of all muscles of one side 
functions. of the face. A unilateral upper motor neuron lesion, 

The facial nerve nucleus is in the caudal pons, lying however, will cause weakness of the lower half of 
ventrolateral to the sixth cranial nerve nucleus (see the face with sparing of the upper half of the face 
Fig. 16.3). It receives upper motor neuron input from because there is bilateral representation of the upper 
both cerebral hemispheres. Lower motor neuron half of the face in the motor cortex.
fibres from the facial nucleus first pass round the 
sixth nerve nucleus, then emerge from the pons to Testing the facial nerve
form the facial nerve. From here, it travels laterally, Look for asymmetry of the face. Ask the patient to 
adjacent to the eighth cranial nerve, to the internal raise his eyebrows (to look astonished), to blink and 
auditory meatus, thence to the facial canal which has then to screw both eyes up, firmly closed. On a weak 
a relatively long and tortuous course through the side, the eyelashes will be less buried by the eyelids. 
skull, emerging at the stylomastoid foramen. The Attempt to raise the patient’s eyebrows while his 
nerve then passes forward into the parotid gland and eyes are closed and screwed up; mild weakness may 
divides into branches which supply all the facial be detected. When there is severe lower motor neuron 
muscles and the platysma muscle on one side. In the facial weakness, the patient will not be able to close 
facial canal, a branch of the facial nerve supplies the the affected eye. Attempted eye closure will be 
stapedius muscle. accompanied by elevation of the eyes (Bell’s phe-

The nerve cell bodies of the sensory components nomenon). Ask the patient to blow his cheeks out, 
of the facial nerve are in the geniculate ganglion in to show his teeth (or gums) and then to grimace. 
the facial canal. Gustatory sensory afferents from the Observe the patient’s spontaneous smiles. (In some 
anterior two-thirds of the tongue travel in the lingual upper motor neuron disorders of facial muscle control, 
nerve and then via the chorda tympani nerve to join voluntary movement of the lower face is lost but 
the facial nerve in the facial canal. Central projections smiling is relatively preserved.) Ask the patient to 
reach the medulla via the nervus intermedius between purse his lips together and attempt to open them 
the facial and eighth cranial nerve. using your fingers. These tests usually suffice to pick 

The peripheral projections of the small general up facial weakness and to distinguish between upper 
somatic sensory contribution innervate the tympanic and lower motor neuron disorders.



324 16 Nervous system ﻿

The cochlear and vestibular (VIII) nerves mild vertigo but nystagmus that does not diminish 
with repeated testing.

These two nerves convey afferents from the cochlea The head thrust test (head impulse test) detects a 
and the vestibular apparatus, respectively, via the failure of the afferent component of the vestibulo-
internal auditory meatus to the pontomedullary ocular reflex. In a normal individual, fixating on an 
junction in close proximity to the facial nerve, reaching object straight ahead, an abrupt rotation of the head 
cochlear and vestibular nuclei in the brainstem. Acute to one side or the other will not disrupt ocular fixation. 
sensorineural deafness and acute vestibular neuritis In a patient with an acute unilateral peripheral 
reflect separate pathologies selectively affecting each vestibulopathy (vestibular neuritis), a head thrust 
of these nerves. rotating the front of the head towards the side of 

the lesion will result in the eyes turning with the 
Testing the cochlear and vestibular nerves head momentarily and a noticeable saccade to bring 
The assessment of deafness is covered in detail else- the eyes back to restore fixation. This test is useful 
where (Ch. 21). At the bedside, a crude assessment in distinguishing acute vertigo caused by vestibular 
of hearing can be achieved by rubbing your index neuritis from vertigo caused by a brainstem stroke 
finger and thumb together close to the patient’s ear or transient ischaemic attack. With the patient’s gaze 
or by whispering numbers close to his ear, with the fixed on the examiner’s nose, the examiner then 
contralateral ear occluded. Rinne’s test is good for abruptly turns the patient’s head successively about 
distinguishing between conduction and sensorineural 30° to the right and left.
deafness, as long as you use the appropriate tuning 
fork (frequency 512 Hz – not the lower frequency The glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve
tuning fork (128 Hz) used for testing vibration sense).

Conduction deafness is sometimes of neurological There are anatomical and functional relationships 
significance if an infective or neoplastic middle ear between the glossopharyngeal nerve, the vagus nerve 
lesion has spread to affect middle or posterior cranial and the cranial component of the accessory nerve. 
fossa structures. The nucleus ambiguus in the medulla (Fig. 16.8) 

Unilateral sensorineural deafness is an important contains the motor neurons which innervate striated 
feature of ‘cerebellopontine angle lesions’, such as muscle of the palate, pharynx, larynx and upper 
acoustic neuroma or meningioma, along with variable oesophagus, fibres running partly in the glossopharyn-
combinations of facial weakness (facial nerve), facial geal nerve, mainly in the vagus nerve and partly in 
sensory symptoms (trigeminal nerve), nystagmus the cranial portion of the accessory nerve. Situated 
(brainstem and vestibular nerve), ataxia (brainstem more dorsally in the medulla, the dorsal motor nucleus 
and cerebellum), and ultimately long tract signs of the vagus and the inferior salivatory nucleus (whose 
(brainstem) and raised intracranial pressure. fibres join the glossopharyngeal nerve) contain 

Bilateral sensorineural deafness may be a feature preganglionic parasympathetic neurons which control 
of certain multisystem neurological disorders, par-
ticularly mitochondrial disorders.

Two important tests of vestibular function assess Dorsal vagal Sympathetic
much of the vestibular system (the semicircular canals nucleus tract Inferior
of the labyrinths, the vestibular nerves and the ves- Posterolateral XII Vestibular cerebellar
tibular nuclei of the brainstem). These are the Dix- PICA territory nucleus nuclei peduncle
Hallpike test for positioning vertigo and nystagmus 
and the head thrust test. They should be performed 
in patients with vertigo. V tract

The Dix-Hallpike test is described in Chapter 21. and

Far and away the commonest cause of positioning nucleus

vertigo is the condition benign paroxysmal position- Nucleus

ing vertigo, a labyrinthine disorder, and it is by far tractus

the commonest cause of an abnormal Dix-Hallpike solitarius

test. Vestibular neuritis is usually associated with 
nystagmus that does not require a change in head 
position to elicit it, but in this condition vertigo and 

Spinothalamic
nystagmus are usually exacerbated by positioning Basal tract
tests. Brainstem disorders may also be the cause of PICA Paramedian Medial Nucleus
positioning vertigo and nystagmus. Typically peripheral territory (ASA) lemniscus ambiguus Inferior
disorders are associated with a latent period between territory olivary
head movement and onset of vertigo and nystagmus, Pyramid nucleus
intense vertigo, and a reduction of the vertigo and Figure 16.8  A diagram of cranial nerve nuclei and tracts in the 
nystagmus with repeated testing, whereas central medulla. Vascular territories are shown on the left. ASA, anterior 
positioning nystagmus may be associated with rather spinal artery; PICA, posterior inferior cerebellar artery. 



SECTION Three
325

Nervous system ﻿
glands and smooth muscle. Special visceral afferents In addition, ipsilateral vocal cord paresis will lead to 
(i.e. taste fibres from the intermediate nerve and the dysphonia. Bilateral lesions of the vagus nerves will 
glossopharyngeal nerve) enter the solitary tract to invariably be associated with dysphagia. (Bilateral 
end in the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla. palatal weakness is not commonly due to bilateral 
General somatic sensory afferents in the glossopharyn- vagus lesions but rather to more diffuse disorders 
geal and vagus nerves join trigeminal sensory nuclei. such as polyneuropathy or myasthenia gravis.) The 

The glossopharyngeal nerve rootlets emerge from the effects of bilateral lesions of innervation of the larynx 
medulla just rostral to those of the vagus nerve. vary depending on whether there is weakness mainly 
The glossopharyngeal nerve leaves the skull via the of vocal cord abduction or adduction or both. Bilateral 
jugular foramen. It mediates somatic sensation of abductor weakness puts the patient at risk of stridor 
the palate and pharynx and gustatory sensation from and respiratory obstruction. Bilateral adductor weak-
the posterior third of the tongue, has autonomic ness leads to dysphonia and inability to generate a 
secretomotor fibres which reach the parotid gland, normal explosive cough (the cough which the patient 
and supplies the stylopharyngeus muscle (which can manage is described as a bovine cough).
cannot be tested clinically).

The accessory (XI) nerve
Testing the glossopharyngeal nerve
The glossopharyngeal nerve is not tested in routine The cranial accessory nerve is formed of nerve fibres 
neurological examinations. If there are particular from the nucleus ambiguus and they soon leave the 
clinical indications to test it, such as a symptom of accessory nerve to rejoin their equivalents in the 
pharyngeal sensory impairment, pharyngeal neuro- vagus nerve. The spinal accessory nerve consists of 
pathic pain or a lesion of the vagus nerve, pharyngeal motor nerve fibres from the cervical spinal cord 
sensation can be tested using an orange stick to touch (C2-6); instead of leaving the spinal cord in spinal 
lightly the mucosa of the posterior pharyngeal wall. roots, they pass rostrally up into the medulla and 
This requires tolerance and cooperation on the part emerge as the accessory nerve which, along with the 
of the patient. Some normal individuals will gag even glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, passes through 
at the approach of a tongue depressor or orange stick. the jugular foramen. The spinal accessory nerve 
In stuporous or comatose patients, testing the gag supplies the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the 
reflex may be useful. The afferent component of this upper part of the trapezius muscle.
reflex involves the glossopharyngeal nerves. Testing the accessory nerve

The left sternocleidomastoid muscle contributes 
The vagus (X) nerve to rotation of the head to the right and vice versa. 
The rootlets of the vagus emerge from the medulla Weakness of the left sternocleidomastoid is therefore 
just below those of the glossopharyngeal nerve. Both assessed by asking the patient to turn his head to 
nerves leave the base of the skull through the jugular the right with force, while the examiner opposes 
foramen. The vagus nerve passes down the neck the rotation with the left hand, pushing carefully 
adjacent to the internal carotid artery and internal against the right side of the face. Failure of contraction 
jugular vein. Motor efferent fibres supply pharyngeal of the muscle can be seen. Weakness of the upper 
muscles. The superior laryngeal nerve supplies the part of trapezius is one of the causes of winging of 
cricopharyngeus muscle of the larynx and conveys the scapula, the other being weakness of serratus 
sensation from the larynx. Lower down in the thorax, anterior due to a lesion of the long thoracic nerve (see 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve passes back up the neck p. 331). Scapular winging due to trapezius weak-
to supply the laryngeal muscles other than cri- ness is most commonly caused by a lesion of the 
copharyngeus. The visceral afferent and efferent fibres accessory nerve in the posterior triangle of the neck, 
of the vagus nerve downstream of the recurrent often iatrogenic related to surgical excision of a 
laryngeal nerves are not amenable to clinical neurologi- lymph node.
cal examination. The hypoglossal (XII) nerve
Testing the vagus nerve The hypoglossal nucleus in the medulla contains 
A patient with a proximal unilateral lesion of the motor neurons which innervate tongue muscles. The 
vagus nerve may complain of dysphagia and nasal nerve leaves the lower medulla, passing through the 
regurgitation of swallowed fluids. There will be weak- hypoglossal canal to leave the base of the skull, then 
ness of the muscles of the soft palate on the affected down and forward to reach the tongue.
side. Attempted voluntary elevation of the soft palate 
(ask the patient to say ‘Ahh’, preferably fairly high Testing the hypoglossal nerve
pitched) reveals the weakness of elevation of the A unilateral hypoglossal nerve lesion in the acute 
palate on the affected side, along with deviation of stage leads to weakness of tongue muscles on the 
the uvula to the unaffected side, because of the affected side. Attempted protrusion of the tongue 
unopposed action of the palatal muscles on that side. results in deviation of the tongue towards the weak 



326 16 Nervous system ﻿

A B

Figure 16.9  (A) The tongue of a patient with an acute left hypoglossal nerve lesion. She had noticed weight loss for 3 months and pain 
at the back of the neck on the left side for 1 month. She was afebrile and the only sign was the weak tongue. (B) A T2-weighted MRI scan 
at the base of the skull shows abnormal tissue (thick arrow) under the skull and infiltrating into the hypoglossal canal (thin arrow). The 
hypoglossal canal on the right side is normal (dotted arrow). MRI scans of the neck revealed lymphadenopathy (not shown). A fine needle 
aspirate from one of the nodes (hence the adhesive dressing seen in the photograph) was not diagnostic. An open lymph node biopsy 
confirmed the diagnosis of tuberculosis. 

side (Fig. 16.9). A chronic lesion will be associated Parkinsonism (hypokinetic dysarthria)
with visible muscle atrophy of the affected side 
of the tongue. Bilateral wasting and weakness of In parkinsonism there may be dysarthria and other 
the tongue with fasciculation are usually due to disorders of speech and language such as acquired 
the progressive bulbar atrophy of motor neuron stutter as well as dysphonia.
disease.

Bulbar palsy (flaccid dysarthria)
Speech Bulbar refers to the medulla oblongata, and bulbar 

palsy denotes any weakness of muscles supplied by 
Dysphonia is an abnormality of production of vocal the seventh to twelfth cranial nerves from the pons 
sounds. Vocal cord paresis therefore causes dysphonia. and medulla. Dysarthria and dysphagia are the main 
Parkinson’s disease may cause dysphonia and certainly manifestations. Palatal weakness allows nasal escape 
hypophonia, a low-volume voice. of air during production of plosive sounds. There are 

Dysarthria is an abnormality of articulation, for many causes, ranging from muscle disorders, myas-
which neurological disease is an important cause. thenia gravis and polyneuropathies to lower motor 
Those with a musical ear may be good at distinguishing neuronopathies. In myasthenia, fatigue may be evident, 
spastic from cerebellar dysarthrias, but experienced the dysarthria developing as the patient talks.
neurologists sometimes get this wrong. The important Severe upper motor neuron lesions such as strokes 
thing is to detect mild dysarthria and look for other will produce dysarthria, and it may also be a feature 
signs which will clarify its basis and to consider that of certain dysphasias.
a patient who has dysarthria may, more importantly, 
have dysphagia. Motor system
Spastic dysarthria For the purposes of clinical neurological examination 
An upper motor neuron disorder affects the tongue, and interpretation of neurological signs, the anatomical 
pharynx and facial muscles. Tongue movements are considerations can be kept simple. The motor neurons 
slow, the jaw jerk is brisk and facial stretch reflexes whose axons terminate at neuromuscular junctions and 
may be present. If part of a pseudobulbar palsy is which activate voluntary striated muscle contraction 
due to diffuse small vessel cerebrovascular disease or are situated in the anterior horns of the spinal cord 
motor neuron disease, there will be associated cogni- grey matter and in motor cranial nerve nuclei. These 
tive abnormalities and limb signs. are the lower motor neurons. Upper motor neurons 

are those situated in the cerebral cortex whose axons 
Cerebellar (ataxic) dysarthria leave the cortex to control, directly or indirectly, 

the lower motor neurons. Some of these are in the 
Look carefully for nystagmus and other eye movement somatotopically organized primary motor cortex (Fig. 
disorders and for limb and gait ataxia. 16.10) in the precentral gyrus at the back of the frontal 



SECTION Three
327

Nervous system ﻿
intercostal and abdominal trunk muscles. Cervical, 
first thoracic, lumbar and sacral spinal nerve ventral 
rami pass into plexuses (cervical, brachial and lum-

Ankle bosacral) from which are formed named peripheral 
In

T d nerves which mainly supply the limbs. The muscles 
h e

N u x Toes
e supplied by a spinal nerve collectively constitute a 
c m

Bro k b ‘myotome’. (The cutaneous area supplied by a spinal 
E w

yelid
F  

a a
c n nerve is a dermatome.)
e d eyeball The fundamental effect of a lower motor lesion is 

weakness (ultimately paralysis) of affected muscles 
Lips with marked wasting. The effects of upper motor 

neuron lesions are more variable, depending on which 
descending pathways are affected. They are loss of 

Jaw dexterity, weakness and spasticity. An upper motor 
Tongue neuron lesion may cause mild weakness but, neverthe-

less, be incapacitating because of spasticity and 
Swallow

impaired dexterity. On the other hand, a lesion 
restricted to cells in the primary motor cortex itself 
causes weakness without spasticity. With upper motor 
neuron lesions, muscle wasting is much less marked 

Vocalization Salivation Mastication and occurs late.
Figure 16.10  Somatotopic representation in the primary motor 
cortex. Motor system examination

The examination technique for formal assessment of 
the motor system depends very much on the circum-

lobe, but the distribution of upper motor neurons in stances. For instance, a follow-up outpatient assessment 
the cortex is much wider than just the primary motor to gauge the response to treatment of a patient with 
cortex and includes the supplementary motor area myasthenia gravis, polymyositis or even chronic idi-
and premotor cortex in the frontal lobes. The cerebral opathic demyelinating polyneuropathy may be 
control of posture and movement involves widely effectively achieved in the consultation room without 
distributed cortical motor systems. Crucial also are recourse to the examination couch. Here, it is assumed 
circuits involving the basal ganglia and cerebellum. that the patient is presenting for a diagnosis; this 
Output from the cortex is either direct to motor requires complete exposure of limbs, shoulders, trunk 
neurons via corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts or and buttocks, and careful assessment of muscle power 
indirect via projections to the brainstem which has of a large number of muscles or muscle groups.
major influences by various pathways.

The corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts pass via Inspection
the internal capsule and cerebral peduncle to the Start by looking at the muscles of the limbs and 
ventral pons. The corticobulbar tract projects to motor trunk. Pathological hypertrophy of muscle is rare. 
nuclei of cranial nerves V, VII, IX, X and XII bilater- Pseudohypertrophy is also uncommon. It is seen 
ally. The corticospinal tract continues in the medullary mainly in the calf muscles of individuals with certain 
pyramid. The majority of corticospinal tract fibres muscular dystrophies. It is termed ‘pseudohypertrophy’ 
decussate in the lower ventral medulla, passing into because it is associated with weakness, and pathologi-
the lateral corticospinal tract of the spinal cord to cally there is degeneration of muscle with replacement 
innervate contralateral spinal motor neurons. These of muscle tissue by fat.
fibres control movements of the limbs. A minority Wasting of muscle is a common sign of disease, but 
of corticospinal tract fibres do not decussate but does not always have a neurological basis. With disuse, 
proceed straight on into the spinal cord in the anterior muscles atrophy, sometimes quite fast. Generally 
corticospinal tract to project to motor neurons bilater- disuse atrophy is fairly mild. Power is preserved if it 
ally. They control axial muscles involved in posture. can be tested (e.g. quadriceps wasting in someone 

Lower motor neurons in the brainstem send their with severe knee arthritis). Cachexia involves diffuse 
axons directly into cranial nerves. Lower motor muscle wasting, but usually power is surprisingly 
neurons in the spinal cord send their axons via ventral good. Thyrotoxicosis leads to diffuse muscle wasting 
nerve roots into spinal nerves. Spinal nerves divide and ultimately there is weakness (thyrotoxic myo-
into dorsal and ventral rami. Dorsal rami innervate pathy). Many myopathic disorders give rise to wasting, 
paraspinal muscles of the back. Ventral rami innervate and the pattern of wasting (proximal, distal, sym-
the other muscles. The anatomy of the thoracic spinal metrical, asymmetrical and selective, e.g. finger flexor 
nerves is relatively simple, directly reflecting embryo- muscles in the forearm in inclusion body myositis) 
logical segmentation. The ventral rami supply helps diagnostically. Wasting is an important sign of 

Knee
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow

Wrist

Han
d

Litt
le

Ring
Midd

le



328 16 Nervous system ﻿
peripheral nerve disease which affects motor nerve 
fibres. It is denervated muscle which wastes markedly, 
indicating motor nerve terminal or axon or nerve cell 
body loss. Focal motor nerve demyelination with 
conduction block but without denervation causes 
weakness, but there may be little or no wasting. In 
mononeuropathies, the wasting only affects muscles 
supplied by the affected nerve. Sometimes an ulnar 
neuropathy or median nerve lesion at the wrist or a 
common peroneal nerve lesion can be correctly 
diagnosed with reasonable confidence just by observing 
the pattern of wasting. In mononeuropathies, plex-
opathies and radiculopathies, wasted muscles will be 
weak. Motor and mixed motor and sensory polyneu-
ropathies also cause wasting, most commonly distally 
and symmetrically. Disorders of motor nerve cell 
bodies lead to loss of associated axons and wasting. 
Thus, a range of pathologies of the spinal cord cause 
wasting, including processes which affect just motor 
nerve cell bodies, such as motor neuron disease, 
hereditary motor neuronopathies (spinal muscular 
atrophies) and poliomyelitis, and structural spinal Figure 16.11  Pes cavus, with clawing of the toes in a patient 
cord disorders such as syringomyelia. Many elderly with familial neuropathy. This patient had Refsum’s disease and 
patients appear to have wasting of the small muscles the peripheral nerves were slightly enlarged. 
of the hand, but if the strength is normal, there is 
probably actually no muscle wasting.

Fasciculations are spontaneous contractions of the 
muscle fibres of individual motor units within a the medullary pyramids) and the ‘extrapyramidal’ 
muscle at rest, seen as twitches within a muscle. rigidity of parkinsonism.
While widespread fasciculations are rather charac-
teristic of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, they are not Spasticity
always seen in that condition, and they may be seen Spastic hypertonia in the upper limbs affects flexor 
in peripheral neuropathies and radiculopathies and muscles more than extensor muscles. This may give 
in normal individuals who are not fully at rest. They rise to a characteristic posture of the limb which is 
may also be an isolated, benign abnormality. Fascicula- flexed at the elbow, wrist and fingers. There will be 
tions restricted to the calf muscles are common in more resistance to passive extension of these joints 
normal individuals. than to passive flexion. The resistance increases in 

Pes cavus (Fig. 16.11) with clawing of the toes may proportion to the speed of stretch of affected muscles 
be idiopathic or an indication of long-standing imbal- until it suddenly reduces (so-called clasp-knife rigid-
ance of muscle power in the feet (mainly weakness of ity). Accordingly, detecting spasticity is best achieved 
intrinsic foot muscles), caused commonly by Charcot- by fairly fast and vigorous movements of the patient’s 
Marie-Tooth disease but also by other hereditary or limb to stretch relevant muscles. Hold the patient’s 
congenital disorders of peripheral nerve or spinal elbow and hand and extend the elbow briskly, from 
cord. Contractures of joints can be a consequence a fully flexed to a fully extended position. Similar 
of muscle disease, peripheral neuropathy or CNS considerations apply at the wrist and fingers. A spastic 
disease. Scoliosis is common in neurofibromatosis, arm will also have increased tone in pronator muscles. 
but may be a complication of other neurological Brisk passive supination of the forearm will elicit 
disorders such as syringomyelia and Friedreich’s clasp-knife rigidity felt as a ‘pronator catch’.
ataxia. In the leg, spasticity typically affects adductors and 

extensors more than flexors. With spinal cord lesions, 
Assessment of muscle tone the spasticity is often bilateral (a spastic paraparesis). 
Some people can relax their muscles extremely well, Mild bilateral adductor spasticity can be detected 
whereas others tense up during an examination, with the patient lying supine on a couch or bed. Pick 
sometimes making for difficulty in assessing tone. up one leg and abduct it. In doing so, adduction of 
Generally, in adult neurological practice, apparent the contralateral leg will be observed. Mild spasticity 
hypotonia is not very diagnostically useful. The two in quadriceps can be detected by asking the patient 
common and important forms of pathological increase to relax. Then briskly flex his hip by lifting the leg 
in muscle tone are spasticity, reflecting an upper behind the knee. In a normal limb, this will lead to 
motor neuron disorder (imprecisely designated flexion of the knee by gravity of the lower leg. The 
‘pyramidal’ because the corticospinal tracts constitute ankle will remain on the couch, being dragged 



SECTION Three
329

Nervous system ﻿
proximally. If there is spasticity, however, the lower processes and to look for and register the evolving 
leg will be lifted off the bed briefly before falling pattern of weakness as you go along.
back down. Spasticity at the ankle causes plantar- A common problem is non-organic weakness. This 
flexion. Brisk passive dorsiflexion of the ankle, best may reflect malingering or a conversion disorder, but 
done with the knee partially flexed, elicits the spastic- sometimes just indicates that the patient is keen to 
ity in the form of clonus – a succession of involuntary impress on you that there is something the matter. 
brief contractions of the calf muscles. Clonus may In non-organic weakness, intermittency of effort is 
range from a few beats to sustained clonus in which apparent, with variability of power produced from 
there are repetitive calf muscle contractions until second to second, often with a prominent tendency 
pressure on the sole of the foot is removed. abruptly to give way or withhold effort. In contrast, 

the muscle of a patient with organic weakness exerting 
Parkinsonian extrapyramidal rigidity as much force as he can will give in a smooth, continu-
Parkinsonian extrapyramidal rigidity takes two forms: ous way, not a jerky, fluctuating way. Non-organic 
either an increase in muscle tone affecting any move- paralysis is often quite easy to diagnose because of 
ment of any muscle groups (so-called lead-pipe inconsistencies in the patient’s capabilities. For 
rigidity) or rigidity which is modified by tremor instance, a patient may walk into the consulting room 
(so-called cogwheel rigidity, in which a high-frequency normally, mount the examination couch unaided but 
intermittency in the severity of the resistance to be unable to lift a leg into the air because of apparent 
movement is felt). Mild parkinsonian rigidity is paralysis of hip flexion. The non-organic nature of 
sometimes absent when the patient is relaxed but unilateral hip extension weakness may be established 
may be induced by getting the patient to use the by Hoover’s sign. A patient appears to have paralysis 
arm contralateral to the arm being assessed (activated of hip extension. Keep a hand under the affected leg 
rigidity). Passive flexion and extension of the wrist and ask the patient to flex the opposite hip against 
or a rotatory movement of the hand at the wrist are the resistance of your other arm. In doing so, the 
good manoeuvres to pick up parkinsonian rigidity. patient will unwittingly activate the previously para-
Test first with the contralateral arm at rest. Then, if lysed hip extensors.
appropriate, test again, this time for activated rigidity, Clinical methods of recording the severity of muscle 
with the patient moving his opposite arm up and weakness have considerable shortcomings, but in 
down with the fist clenched. In early Parkinson’s neurological practice it is desirable to chart muscle 
disease (PD), rigidity will be detected in a limb or strength in order to document progression or recovery 
the limbs of one side and, although the signs remain and to gauge the effectiveness of therapeutic interven-
asymmetric throughout, in advanced PD rigidity will tions. The Medical Research Council scale is widely 
affect all the limbs and the neck and trunk. Extrapy- used (Box 16.3), but a problem with this scale is 
ramidal neck rigidity affects movements of the neck that the vast majority of muscle weakness one will 
in all directions. This contrasts with the neck stiffness encounter is grade 4. It also performs badly for fingers 
of meningitis (see Chapter 9) in which neck flexion and toes where gravity has scarcely any influence, so 
is stiff, restricted and painful, while rotation is rela- that grades 1, 2 and 3 are more or less identical. 
tively supple. Many clinicians find a scale of normal power, mild, 

moderate and severe weakness and paralysis is practical 
Paratonia (Gegenhalten) for everyday use. Accurate quantitative myometry 
This is seen in patients with fairly advanced dementia. ought to be a way forward but has hardly entered 
Whichever way you attempt to move the patient’s routine clinical practice.
limb, he puts up active resistance. There is not the space here to describe in detail 

the testing of all the important individual muscles 
Testing muscle power and muscle groups. Tables 16.6 and 16.7 represent 
This is a skill which requires considerable practice a summary of commonly tested muscles and their 
in order to learn how to encourage patients to cooper- actions, but a number of specific points are important:
ate fully and demonstrate the full amount of power ■	 There are two tests in which muscle strength is 
they have at their disposal and to be able to make routinely tested isotonically (i.e. the muscle 
correct judgements about the presence of weakness. shortens while lifting a constant load) as 
With few exceptions, isometric contraction (in which opposed to isometrically. Abdominal trunk 
a muscle exerts a force but does not change in length) muscles are tested by asking the patient to sit 
is tested by the examiner opposing the action of the up from lying flat with his arms folded on his 
patient’s muscle(s). Clearly the average healthy young chest. Standing up from a sitting position or 
doctor will be stronger than a child or a frail elderly rising from a crouched position are good tests of 
person but otherwise normal person, so judgement hip and knee extension and spine extension 
has to be applied. Conversely some patients will be muscles and are useful in testing patients with 
stronger than the examiner. It is important to be myopathies. Normally these actions can be 
thinking about the patterns of muscle weakness which accomplished without use of the arms. Weak 
are likely to be found in different kinds of disease patients often have to resort to using their arms 



330 16 Nervous system ﻿

Box 16.3 ■
  The Medical Research Council scale for grading 	 People sometimes test ulnar nerve-supplied small 

muscle strength hand muscles by squeezing together the 
abducted index and small fingers (first dorsal 

■	 Grade 0: no contraction interosseous and abductor digiti minimi muscles). 
■	 Grade 1: flicker or trace of contraction It is better to test these two muscles individually.
■	 Grade 2: active movement with gravity eliminated ■	 Mild weakness of calf muscles (gastrocnemii and 
■	 Grade 3: active movement against gravity soleus) is difficult to detect on a couch. A good 
■	 Grade 4: active movement against gravity and technique is to get the patient to walk around 

resistance on ‘tiptoes’. The ankle sags in a leg affected by 
■	 Grade 5: normal power mild plantarflexion weakness.

Commonly Grade 4 is divided into 4−, 4 and 4+, ■	 Rather than thinking solely about the myotomes 
denoting severe, moderate and mild weakness, and some supplying the relevant muscles, it is better 
use 5− to signify minimal weakness. simultaneously to be thinking, ‘Is this the 

pattern of weakness one sees in upper motor 
neuron disorders (monoparesis, hemiparesis, 
paraparesis, tetraparesis); is this the weakness of 
a polyneuropathy (usually distal symmetrical 
weakness except in demyelinating 
polyneuropathies which give substantial 
proximal weakness as well); is the weakness best 
explained by a nerve root lesion or lesions; is 
the weakness best explained by a lesion of an 
individual nerve or by a number of nerves or by 
a plexus lesion; is the pattern of weakness due 
to a muscle disorder (often proximal 
symmetrical weakness)?’

Cerebellar system
The anatomy of the cerebellum is complex; it receives 
afferents of virtually every kind and its efferents 
connect to virtually every part of the brain and spinal 
cord. Important afferents include those from the 
motor cortex, visual cortex, vestibular nuclei and 
spinal cord. Vestibular afferents connect to the floc-
culonodular lobe. Lesions here cause disequilibrium 
and gait ataxia. Spinocerebellar tracts go mainly to 
the vermis, in the midline of the cerebellum. Lesions 
here cause truncal and gait ataxia. Each cerebellar 
hemisphere receives a major input from the 

Figure 16.12  Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Xp21 dystrophy). contralateral cerebral cortex via pontine nuclei and 
There is pseudohypertrophy of the weak muscles (e.g. the calves the middle cerebellar peduncles. The major output 
and deltoids). The child is ‘climbing up himself’ with legs widely from the cerebellum is via the superior cerebellar 
placed as he gets up from the sitting position to the standing peduncles. Fibres from the cerebellar hemispheres 
position. This is Gowers’ sign. cross to the contralateral red nucleus and thalamus, 

thence to spinal cord and basal ganglia and cerebral 
hemispheres. Thus, whereas cerebral cortex lesions 
affect contralateral limbs, cerebellar hemisphere lesions 

to push themselves up, either using surrounding cause incoordination of ipsilateral limbs.
furniture or, failing that, pushing themselves up Incoordination, ataxia and tremor are the main 
with their arms on their own legs (Gowers’ sign; effects of cerebellar lesions. Given the widespread 
Fig. 16.12). afferent and efferent connections of the cerebellum, 

■	 Testing neck flexion and extension is important it is clear that lesions outside the cerebellum itself 
in myopathies, in myasthenia gravis and in may have clinical manifestations which closely 
motor neuron disease. resemble those of cerebellar disease, and this needs 

■	 Deltoids, spinati, the pectoralis major muscles, to be borne in mind when examining patients. Thus, 
hip abductors and hip adductors can be tested gait ataxia may be seen with cerebral, brainstem or 
bilaterally simultaneously, but all other muscles spinal cord disorders, and tremor and ataxia can be 
must be tested in each limb separately. manifestations of brainstem lesions.



SECTION Three
331

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.6  Muscles of the upper limbs which are commonly examined (P is patient; E is examiner)
Nerve, nerve 

Action Muscle roots Method Comment
Shoulder
Abduction Supraspinatus Suprascapular, P attempts to abduct arms 

C5, C6 from chest; E resists
External rotation Infraspinatus Suprascapular, P holds upper arms down, 

C5, C6 forearms forward and 
attempts to externally 
rotate upper arms; E resists

Abduction, Deltoid Axillary, C5, C6 Arms abducted; E pushes 
extension down
Adduction of Pectoralis Pectoral nerves, P: arms stretched forward 
arms with major C5, C6, C7, C8 horizontal; P pushes fists 
shoulder flexed together; E resists
Lateral and Serratus Long thoracic, P pushes arm forward Serratus weakness causes winging 
forward anterior C5, C6, C7 against resistance of the scapula, noticed more with 
movement and the arm forward*
fixation of the Trapezius weakness is the other 
scapula major cause of scapula winging, 

noticed more with the arm abducted
Instability of the shoulder caused by 
either is disabling

Elbow
Flexion Biceps Musculocutaneous, E holds P’s distal forearm 

C5, C6 and shoulder; P pulls;  
E resists

Flexion Brachioradialis Radial, C5, C6 P flexes elbow with forearm The muscle is not the major flexor, 
midway between pronation but can be seen and palpated
and supination; E resists Weak, therefore less visible, with a 

radial nerve lesion
Weak and wasted in certain 
dystrophies

Extension Triceps Radial, C6, C7 E holds P’s distal forearm 
and shoulder; P pushes;  
E resists

Wrist
Extension, Extensor carpi Radial, C6, C7 P makes a fist and extends 
abduction radialis longus wrist against resistance

(ECRL)
Extension, Extensor carpi Posterior P makes a fist and extends If ECU is weak and ECRL is not, on 
adduction ulnaris (ECU) interosseous, C7, wrist against resistance wrist extension there is radial 

C8 deviation (abduction) of the wrist
Flexion, Flexor carpi Median, C6, C7 P flexes supinated wrist up Adduction (ulnar deviation) occurs if 
abduction radialis (FCR) against resistance, fingers FCR is weak and FCU is not

relaxed
Flexion, Flexor carpi Ulnar, C7, C8, T1 P flexes supinated wrist up Abduction (radial deviation) occurs 
adduction ulnaris (FCU) against resistance, fingers if FCU is weak and FCR is not

relaxed
Fingers
Extension Extensor Posterior Hand prone, P extends 

digitorum interosseous, C7, fingers against resistance
communis C8

Continued



332 16 Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.6  Continued
Nerve, nerve 

Action Muscle roots Method Comment
Flexion Flexor digitorum F2, F3: anterior P has back of hand on a Finger flexion is achieved by FDP 

profundus interosseous, C7, flat surface; E holds middle and flexor digitorum superficialis
(FDP) C8, T1 phalanx down; P flexes The latter flexes the proximal 

F4, F5: ulnar, C7, distal phalanx against interphalangeal (IP) joints  
C8, T1 resistance and secondarily the 

metacarpophalangeal joints
FDP flexes the distal IP joints,  
and secondarily the other two
Testing grip (all flexors together) is 
useful, for instance in a patient 
with a hemiparesis
Testing each component of FDP 
individually is useful in anterior 
interosseous and ulnar nerve lesions

Thumb abduction Abductor Median, C8, T1 P has palm flat and sticks APB can be seen and palpated and 
pollicis brevis thumb up in the air and its strength can be tested (abductor 
(APB) keeps it there while E pollicis longus has a different 

attempts to push it towards action, being more of an extensor, 
the index finger so action of APB can reliably be 

assessed more or less in isolation)
Abduction of the First dorsal Ulnar, C8, T1 P spreads fingers; E 1st DIO can be seen and palpated 
index finger interosseous attempts to adduct P’s and its strength tested

muscle (1st index finger; P resists You can pit the strength of your 1st 
DIO) DIO against that of the patient

Abduction of fifth Abductor digiti Ulnar, C8, T1 P spreads fingers; E Usually not much added value over 
finger minimi attempts to adduct P’s fifth 1st DIO, except in a lesion of the 

finger; P resists deep palmar branch of ulnar nerve 
when ADM will be strong but 1st DIO 
weak

F2, index finger; F3, middle finger; F4, fourth finger; F5, fifth finger.

Table 16.7  Muscles of the lower limbs which are commonly examined (P is patient; E is examiner)
Nerve(s), nerve 

Action Muscle roots Method Comment
Hip
Flexion Iliopsoas Lumbar plexus, P flexes hip to 90° and 

femoral, L1, L2, flexes knee; E attempts to 
L3 extend hip; P resists

Can be done with P lying or 
sitting
If sitting, stabilize P at 
shoulder

Extension Gluteus maximus Inferior gluteal, P lies on back; E attempts to Method described is quick, but to 
L5, S1, S2 lift the leg, lifting distal inspect or palpate the muscles, P 

femur needs to lie prone
If P really tries, pelvis will 
lift off bed

Adduction Adductor magnus, Obturator, L2, P squeezes legs together;  
longus and brevis L3, L4 E tries to prise them apart

Abduction Gluteus medius, Superior gluteal P tries to separate legs;  
gluteus minimus L4, L5, S1 E pushes them together



SECTION Three
333

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.7  Continued
Nerve(s), nerve 

Action Muscle roots Method Comment
Knee
Extension Quadriceps Femoral, L2, L3, P lying down, flexes knee to *P could extend knee pushing heel 

femoris L4 90°; E puts left arm under down bed or couch against 
knee; P extends knee (raises resistance even with very weak 
lower leg up into the air,  quads by using hip extension
not along the bed*); E 
resists with right hand
Can also test knee extension 
with P sitting, legs dangling

Flexion Hamstrings Sciatic, L4, L5, P pulls heel towards bottom; If signs at the ankle and foot do 
S1, S2 E applies resistance, one not distinguish an L5 lesion from a 

hand behind ankle, the other common peroneal nerve lesion, look 
at the front of the knee carefully for weakness here

Ankle
Dorsiflexion Tibialis anterior Deep peroneal, P dorsiflexes ankle fully; E Another way of testing ankle 

(TA) L4, L5 attempts to plantarflex dorsiflexion is to get P to walk 
(extend) ankle around on his heels

Inversion Tibialis posterior Tibial, L5, S1 P inverts foot against Clear weakness of TP helps to 
(TP) resistance distinguish an L5 radiculopathy 

Foot must be fully from a common peroneal nerve 
plantarflexed or otherwise TA lesion
contributes to inversion

Eversion Peroneus longus Superficial P everts foot against 
and brevis peroneal, L5, resistance

S1
Plantarflexion Medial and lateral Tibial, L5, S1, P uses E’s hand as an Mild weakness is best appreciated 

gastrocnemius; S2 accelerator or clutch pedal; by having P walk around on tiptoes
soleus E resists Muscle bulk on the two sides is 

best compared with P standing
Toes
Big toe Extensor hallucis Deep peroneal, P extends great toe against This may be the only weakness 
extension longus L5, S1 resistance detectable in a mild L5 

radiculopathy
Extension of Extensor Deep peroneal, P extends toes against EDB wastes in individuals with 
the other toes digitorum longus L5, S1 resistance weak feet due to polyneuropathy 

and brevis but may remain bulky in those with 
(EDL and EDB) myopathy

Flexion Flexor digitorum Tibial, L5, S1 P flexes toes against The long toe flexors flex the distal 
longus; flexor resistance interphalangeal joints primarily
hallucis longus Intrinsic foot muscles (plantar 

nerves) flex the toes at the 
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints
Weakness of them leads to 
extension of the toes at the MTP 
joints and flexion more distally, 
seen in association with pes cavus*

*see Fig. 16.11



334 16 Nervous system ﻿

Examination of limb coordination Reflexes
The finger-nose test The jaw jerk, tendon reflexes, abdominal reflexes and 

plantar reflexes comprise the major commonly tested 
A mild cerebellar lesion gives rise to no limb signs reflexes.
at rest, but movements of affected limbs may be 
accompanied by action tremor. Actions are clumsy The jaw jerk and tendon reflexes
and inaccurate. Coordination of the arm is tested by 
the finger-nose test. Hold up an index finger in front The jaw jerk and tendon reflexes are monosynaptic 
of the patient. Ask him to touch it with the tip of stretch reflexes. Sudden stretching of a muscle by 
his index finger, then with the same finger to touch striking its tendon sends an impulse from muscle 
his nose, and then ask him to carry on, touching spindle afferents which synapse directly with motor 
alternately your finger and his nose. Some make the neurons, leading to reflex contraction of that muscle. 
test a bit more difficult by moving the finger from The reflexes provide information about both the motor 
place to place, but this adds little. More important system and the sensory system. Abnormally brisk 
is to make sure that the patient has to stretch a little reflexes contribute to the clinical picture of an upper 
to reach the finger, so that coordination is seen over motor neuron disorder. Absence of reflexes occurs in 
the full range of movement of the arm. The observed disorders of sensory afferents from muscle spindles in 
action tremor is of fairly low tremor frequency, a wide range of sensory polyneuropathies, radiculopa-
sometimes of quite large amplitude, and it becomes thies and mononeuropathies. Motor neuropathies and 
more marked in amplitude as the patient’s finger eventually myopathies may entail areflexia, but areflexia 
approaches the target (his nose or your finger). This more commonly reflects a sensory rather than a motor 
gives rise to the term ‘intention tremor’. system disorder. The other important cause of wide-

In more severe cerebellar lesions, there will be spread areflexia, which can cause considerable confu-
postural as well as action tremor. In the extreme, the sion, is a spinal cord lesion which is extensive up and 
postural and action tremors are incapacitating. In down the cord. In this situation, interruption of 
such circumstances, the finger-nose test is inappropri- afferents to motor neurons in the anterior horns or 
ate, being dangerous to the patient, whose finger damage to the motor neurons themselves prevent the 
might poke an eye or any other part of his face. reflexes from occurring. Examples include syringo-

myelia, extensive myelitis, spinal cord infarction and 
extensive intramedullary spinal cord tumours.

Dysdiadochokinesis Pathologically brisk reflexes below a particular 
Ask the patient to tap his fingers rapidly on the back myotome level raise the possibility of a spinal cord 
of his other hand. Then get him to repeat the test, lesion between the lowest normal reflex level and 
this time turning the tapping hand so that the tapping the highest abnormal reflex level. Remember that a 
is alternately done with the palmar and the dorsal focal spinal cord lesion will interrupt the pathway 
sides of the fingers. Each tap should be on the same of any reflex at that level. Thus, the combination of 
spot, not adjacent parts of the back of the hand. loss of a reflex at a particular level and abnormally 

Irregularity and clumsiness indicate an ipsilateral brisk reflexes subserved by levels below points strongly 
cerebellar hemisphere disturbance. Dysdiadochokinesis to a focal spinal cord lesion. One of the limitations 
is not very specific; impairment is also seen in of these analyses is the restricted number of reflexes 
pyramidal and extrapyramidal disorders as well. that can be examined. The biceps reflex is at C5 or 

C6 level and there is no reflex that corresponds to 
C4 or higher except for the jaw jerk. If all the reflexes 

The heel-shin test are pathologically brisk but the jaw jerk is not, there 
The heel-shin test assesses lower limb coordination. may be a high cervical spinal cord lesion. Normal 
The patient lies on a couch or bed. Ask him first to upper-limb power and reflexes and a spastic parapa-
lift one leg into the air, then to put the heel of that resis with pathologically brisk lower-limb reflexes 
leg on to the shin of the other leg just below the may indicate a thoracic spinal cord lesion, but there 
knee and run the heel down the front of the shin on are no tendon reflexes between C8 (finger reflexes) 
to the dorsum of the foot. Cerebellar dysfunction is and adductor reflexes (L2 or L3) to localize the lesion 
revealed as tremor when the patient attempts to more precisely. A pathologically brisk jaw jerk in a 
place his heel at the top of the shin and as an inability patient with a spastic tetraparesis points to the site 
accurately to run the heel down the shin. of the causative pathology being in the cerebral 

In testing cerebellar function, allowance has to be hemispheres (e.g. diffuse small vessel cerebrovascular 
made for any weakness, particularly spastic weakness disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or hydrocephalus) 
which by itself causes a certain amount of incoordina- rather than in the cervical spinal cord.
tion. Furthermore, it is essential to test proprioception, 
because proprioceptive loss can give rise to signs Testing the jaw jerk
which look just like cerebellar incoordination (sensory Ask the patient to let his jaw hang down in a relaxed 
ataxia). manner with the mouth slightly open. Place your 



SECTION Three
335

Nervous system ﻿
index finger across his chin. Strike it lightly with a is important not to jump to conclusions about the 
tendon hammer; reflex contraction of both masseters presence of upper motor neuron lesions or polyneu-
is the response. Sometimes an extremely brisk jaw ropathies just on the basis of reflexes alone. Normal 
jerk is accompanied by clonus. individuals who have absent reflexes tested in the 

standard way will usually have reflexes if they are 
Testing the tendon reflexes brought out by reinforcement. To reinforce lower 
Eliciting tendon reflexes is not completely straight- limb reflexes, ask the patient to put his hands together 
forward and requires practice. The aim is to ensure with the fingers interlocked. Then get ready to elicit 
that the tendon of the relevant muscle being tested the reflex, ask the patient to squeeze with his hands 
is briskly and effectively struck. Accordingly, sufficient and then directly test the reflex. Upper limb reflexes 
force must be delivered. For the biceps reflex, place can also be reinforced. Ask the patient to squeeze 
your own finger over the tendon and strike your firmly something held in the hand contralateral to 
finger. Similarly the brachioradialis reflex can be the limb in which the reflexes are to be tested (e.g. 
elicited by applying the tendon hammer to your own the barrel of a standard ophthalmoscope).
fingers positioned just above the wrist on the lateral 
aspect of the radius bone. The other standard reflexes Abdominal reflexes
(triceps, knee (quadriceps) and ankle (gastrocnemii The stimulus is a light stroke of the abdominal skin 
and soleus)) involve directly striking the tendon with using an orange stick. The normal response is contrac-
the tendon hammer. The standard tendon reflexes tion of abdominal wall muscles in the region where 
examined are summarized in Table 16.8. the stimulus is delivered, noted as movement of the 

The range of briskness of normal reflexes is very umbilicus towards the region where the response is 
variable both between and within individuals, so it positive. The reflex is absent in spinal lesions above 

Table 16.8  Frequently examined tendon reflexes
Nerve 

Reflex Nerve root(s) Technique Comment*
Biceps Musculocutaneous C5, C6 Elbow flexed 90°, arm relaxed Reduced or absent in radiculopathy 

Strike your finger or thumb located or focal cord pathology at C5–C6 
over the tendon cord level

Brachioradialis Radial C5, C6 Elbow flexed 90°, arm relaxed Mainly of interest when it is inverted 
Strike your finger over the distal (see text)
radius

Triceps Radial C6, C7 Elbow flexed 90°, arm relaxed Reduced or absent in high radial 
Strike the tendon directly, just above nerve lesion, radiculopathy or focal 
the ulna at the back of the elbow cord pathology at C6–C7 level

Finger Median and C8 Have the patient’s hand supine on a Mainly of interest when abnormally 
ulnar flat surface brisk

Put your index finger across the Hoffman’s reflex is a variant
middle phalanges, which will be 
slightly flexed
Strike your finger so as to abruptly 
stretch the finger flexors

Adductor Obturator L2, L3 Separate the legs Result is adduction of both legs 
Apply fingers to medial thigh just when there is a spastic paraparesis
above knee Retained adductor reflex with absent 
Strike fingers knee reflex suggests a femoral 

neuropathy rather than plexopathy 
or radiculopathy

Knee Femoral L3, L4 Knee flexed 45-90°, supported and Reduced in radiculopathy, lumbar 
relaxed plexopathy or femoral neuropathy
Strike the patellar tendon, just 
below the patella

Ankle Tibial branch of S1 Patient externally rotates hip and Absence may be the only sign other 
sciatic flexes knee than restricted straight leg raising 

Hold the foot distally in S1 radiculopathy due to L5/S1 
Strike the Achilles tendon disc prolapse

*The remarks are made with reference to common abnormalities, not every possible one.



336 16 Nervous system ﻿
the level at which the reflex is being tested, and the 
reflexes are sometimes absent at a very early stage 
in multiple sclerosis. With symptoms or signs of a 
sensory level on the abdomen, the reflexes may be 
absent below the sensory level and retained above.

Testing the abdominal reflexes
The patient should be supine, relaxed, with the 
abdomen fully exposed. Start the stroke of the orange 
stick right round in the flank, drawing it to the midline. 
Test all four quadrants of the abdomen.

The plantar reflex
Except in neonates and infants, the normal response 
to uncomfortable or painful cutaneous stimulation Figure 16.13  The plantar response. A firm, stroking stimulus  
of the sole of the foot includes plantarflexion of the to the outer edge of the sole of the foot evokes dorsiflexion 
toes. In addition there may be flexion withdrawal of (extension) of the large toe and fanning of the other toes. 
the limb, comprised of dorsiflexion of the ankle and 
flexion of the knee and hip, which can be suppressed 
voluntarily. A remarkably reliable feature of an upper 
motor neuron lesion (anywhere in the spinal cord extension of the toe towards the pin is an extensor 
above L5 cord level or in the brain) affecting the leg response.
being tested is the extensor plantar response (the 
Babinski reflex). The minimum extensor response is Primitive reflexes
extension of the great toe only and it is the key Certain reflexes found in neonates and infants can 
feature to look for. In addition there may be fanning no longer be elicited once the cerebrum matures 
of the other toes and in the thigh contraction of sufficiently, but in the setting of acquired disorders of 
tensor fascia lata. A marked response to plantar one or both frontal lobes of the brain, they reappear 
stimulation in a paralysed patient includes involuntary and are useful as evidence of frontal lobe dysfunction.
dorsiflexion of the ankle, flexion of the knee and 
flexion of the hip. If you are dealing with a patient The grasp reflex
who clearly has spasticity of the leg, a pyramidal Placement of the index and middle fingers into the 
distribution of weakness, pathologically brisk reflexes palm of a normal adult will elicit no response, but a 
and ankle clonus, it hardly matters what the plantar patient with a grasp reflex will, to a greater or lesser 
response is. Occasionally, however, a patient has extent, grip the fingers. With a strong grasp reflex it 
weakness without spasticity or hyperreflexia and the will be possible to pull the arm or indeed the whole 
evidence that there is a CNS disorder hinges on the patient forward without having given any instruction 
plantar reflex. Conversely, agitated individuals may to the patient. A unilateral grasp reflex indicates a 
have increased tone and very brisk reflexes but the contralateral frontal lobe lesion, for instance a tumour 
flexor plantar reflex responses reassure one that there or a stroke. Bilateral grasp reflexes are usually due to 
is no neurological problem. diffuse disorders such as fronto-temporal lobar 

A patient with lower motor neuron paralysis of degenerations or advanced Alzheimer’s disease, diffuse 
toe extension cannot have a conventional extensor small vessel cerebrovascular disease or hydrocephalus. 
response regardless of the severity of any upper motor The sign is important when there is a paucity of 
neuron disorder he may also have. A small number other signs. An inert, mute individual could be 
of malingerers learn to produce extensor responses. depressed, but the presence of grasp reflexes would 
Testing the plantar reflex alert one to the likelihood of organic disease.

The ideal instrument to use is an orange stick (Fig. The pout reflex
16.13). Hold the patient’s foot. Apply the orange A gentle tap on the lips of the patient causes reflex 
stick to the sole of the foot on the lateral border pouting of the lips. This also reflects bilateral frontal 
just in front of the heel. Draw it forward towards pathology. It can be elicited using the head of a 
the base of the fifth toe. This may suffice. Some tendon hammer held covered by a tissue for hygiene.
continue round across the ball of the foot. It is best 
to press fairly firmly, warning the patient that this 
is not a pleasant test. Try to do the test effectively Movement disorders
once or twice, not a large number of times. If you 
remain in doubt as to whether a response is extensor This is a large field encompassing a whole range of 
or not, then later, when testing pinprick sensation, abnormalities of posture, locomotor function and 
test the dorsum of the toe in question. Involuntary movement, with a spectrum from the very common 



SECTION Three
337

Nervous system ﻿
to the distinctly rare. Both hypokinesia and hyper tremor of a patient with essential tremor. In fact, you 
kinesia are abnormal, and the most common important can quite often establish the presence of rest tremor 
disease in this sphere, Parkinson’s disease, combines as well from the history as from examination: ‘When 
both, with akinesia, bradykinesia, dystonia, tremor relaxed on a comfortable sofa watching television, 
and dyskinesia (the latter usually drug induced). does your arm start to shake?’, ‘Do any of your limbs 

shake when you are lying in bed?’ Rest tremor may 
Tremor be observed in a relaxed patient sitting in a chair or 

lying on a couch. Furthermore, if a patient is walking 
Tremor by itself is a common reason for neurological and the fingers of one hand are shaking (and the arm 
referral. Tremor that has not hitherto been noticed is not swinging), it is likely to be the rest tremor of 
by the patient or his doctors may contribute to PD. PD tremor is seen most commonly in the fingers, 
neurological diagnosis. Getting a tremor diagnosis wrist and forearm. It may also affect a foot. Classically, 
wrong is rarely serious, but giving patients incorrect when a PD patient with upper limb rest tremor holds 
diagnoses or prognoses is unsatisfactory and may lead his hands out in front of him, his tremor stops for 
to futile and inappropriate treatments or deprive a 10-20 seconds, whereafter a postural tremor may 
patient of worthwhile treatment. become evident. PD tremor is almost invariably 

The common tremor disorders include enhanced asymmetric, starting in one limb and remaining more 
physiological tremor, essential tremor, parkinsonian marked on that side throughout.
tremor, dystonic tremor, cerebellar (‘intention’) tremor, Essential tremor is not present at rest. It is noted 
drug-induced tremor and psychogenic tremor (Table with maintained postures and during movement. It 
16.9). Combinations of tremor and myoclonus are mainly affects upper limbs. It is usually not markedly 
seen in encephalopathies, mainly in hospitalized asymmetric. The action tremor may be examined 
patients. during the finger-nose test and may also be assessed 

The classical tremor of Parkinson’s disease (PD) is by tasks such as drawing a spiral or a wavy line 
called a rest tremor (a slight contradiction in terms), between two straight lines or while writing, and these 
and it is not always easy to diagnose. The patient’s can be documented in case records. Jaw and lip tremor 
limb shakes when it is relaxed and doing nothing. can be seen in PD and essential tremor patients.
Getting a patient into a position which allows his Even with all the other aspects of examination at 
arms completely to relax in a chair may be difficult; one’s disposal (rigidity, bradykinesia/akinesia, posture, 
beware you are not simply observing the postural gait), distinguishing PD and essential tremor is 

Table 16.9  Common forms of tremor
Tremor variety Comment
Physiological Normal
Enhanced physiological Normal in a stressful enough situation

A constitutionally anxious person may have this and psychogenic tremor
Thyrotoxicosis Perhaps a variant of enhanced physiological tremor
Drug induced The mechanisms here are various: some drugs may also cause ataxia, some parkinsonism, 

some polyneuropathy
Essential Sporadic or familial

Called benign, but severe cases are disabling
Mainly upper limbs, but severe cases can affect legs too (see text)

Parkinsonism Mainly idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (see text), but sometimes parkinsonian tremor is seen in 
other forms of parkinsonism
Wilson’s disease must be excluded in young people with tremor

Dystonic More jerky and irregular than essential tremor, particularly with jerks occurring in one direction
Features of dystonia are also seen
Often a neck tremor

Cerebellar See text
In association with Some patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
polyneuropathy Some patients with chronic idiopathic demyelinating polyneuropathy
Psychogenic Typically exaggerated in clinic

Variable
Settles when patient distracted from shaking
Patient cannot maintain the same frequency of tremor when performing a repetitive task with 
the contralateral limb at a different frequency unless it is a harmonic



338 16 Nervous system ﻿
sometimes difficult. Where there is uncertainty, The pull test
withholding judgement and reviewing after an interval The patient stands with his feet side by side. Stand 
is often helpful. behind the patient with one foot slightly behind 

the other. Explain that, without warning, you are 
Parkinson’s disease going to pull the patient abruptly backwards by his 
The main motor features of PD are summarized in shoulders. The patient’s task is not to fall over. He is 
Box 16.4. Rigidity and tremor have been discussed allowed to step backwards in order to maintain his 
above. Posture and gait are discussed below. balance. Be prepared to catch the patient should he 

Impaired facial expression and generalized brady topple. A normal individual either remains upright 
kinesia or akinesia are observations, but bradykinesia even without moving his feet or does so by taking 
can also be tested formally; elements of the Unified a single step backwards. ‘Retropulsion’ refers to the 
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale can be readily patient taking a number of small paces backwards, 
incorporated into routine clinical practice (see Box either succeeding or failing to reposition his centre 
16.5). Postural stability is tested by the pull test, done of gravity; this is parkinsonian and abnormal. Some 
after testing gait. patients will simply fall backwards without taking 

any paces at all.

Other movement disorders (hyperkinetic 
Box 16.4  Cardinal motor features of Parkinson’s disease movement disorders)
■	 Tremor Generally hyperkinetic movement disorders are 
■	 Akinesia, bradykinesia identified simply by history and by observation rather 
■	 Rigidity than any other component of examination. They are 
■	 Abnormalities of posture summarized in Table 16.10.
■	 Impairment of postural control and balance
■	 Abnormalities of gait
■	 Dysphonia, dysarthria, stammer Sensation

The cell bodies of primary sensory neurons are in 
dorsal root ganglia and equivalent ganglia on cranial 
nerves (particularly the trigeminal ganglion). Their 

Box 16.5  Tests for bradykinesia in Parkinson’s disease peripheral axons convey sensory information from 
sensory end organs in skin, muscle spindles and 

1	 Finger tapping: tendons and other tissues. Their central axons project 
–	 ask the patient to tap repeatedly with his index into the spinal cord or brainstem. Large-diameter 

finger on his thumb. The amplitude of each myelinated axons transmit proprioception, vibration 
movement should be as large as possible and the and touch. Small diameter myelinated and unmyeli-
speed should be as fast as possible. Test one side, nated axons transmit pain and temperature. The 
then the other, not both together. centrally projecting axons for proprioception and 

2	 Hand movements: vibration sense enter the spinal cord and turn imme-
–	 ask the patient repeatedly to fully open his fist and diately to head rostrally in the posterior (dorsal) 

fully close it, again with maximum amplitude and columns ipsilaterally, to synapse in the gracile and 
speed. Test one side, then the other, not both cuneate nuclei at the cervicomedullary junction. 
together. Axons from these nuclei cross in the medulla and 

In these two tests, in PD there is slowness and proceed to the thalamus. In contrast, axons for pain 
progressive reduction of amplitude of the movement, and temperature, having entered the spinal cord, 
sometimes such that the movement ceases altogether. synapse in the dorsal horns. The axons of second-order 
Asymmetry is the rule. sensory neurons cross over to the contralateral 
3	 Pronation-supination movements of the arms: anteriorly (ventrally) situated spinothalamic tracts 

–	 ask the patient to hold both arms out, and and run rostrally all the way to the thalamus. Touch 
repeatedly to pronate and supinate them, with sensation travels by both routes. Sensory pathways 
maximum amplitude and speed. Test both arms from the trigeminal sensory nuclei cross in the 
together. brainstem to project to the contralateral thalamus. 

In this test, asymmetry with impaired amplitude on the From the thalamus, third-order neurons project via 
more affected side is readily observed. the posterior limb of the internal capsule to the 
4	 Leg agility: primary sensory cortex in the parietal lobe, which is 

–	 ask the patient to stamp his heel rapidly and somatotopically organized (Fig. 16.14), akin to the 
repeatedly on the ground, lifting his whole leg at primary motor cortex.
least 3 inches (8 cm) each time. Test each leg The anatomical separation of different modalities 
separately. of sensation in the spinal cord accounts for dissociation 



SECTION Three
339

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.10  Common kinds of movement disorders
Movement disorder Characteristics
Parkinsonism See text
Dystonia Abnormal muscle contractions which may be sustained or repetitive, also involving co-contraction 

of antagonist muscles, leading to an abnormal posture, with or without jerks or tremor
Associated pain and disability
Can be focal, segmental, axial or generalized
A wide range of causes
In adults, idiopathic cervical dystonia is common

Chorea and athetosis Chorea denotes irregular, brief, jerky, unrepetitive, unintentional movements, affecting differing 
(choreoathetosis) parts randomly (unilateral in hemichorea)

In mild cases, the patient just looks fidgety
Many causes including metabolic, drug induced, autoimmune, neurodegenerative
Athetosis denotes slower, more writhing movements than chorea
The two often coexist, particularly in levodopa-induced dyskinesia

Ballism Not very common
Usually hemiballism due to an ischaemic stroke affecting the subthalamic nucleus
The movements are violent with flinging of the limbs

Myoclonus Sudden shock-like jerks of limbs or trunk
Can reflect cortical, brainstem or rarely spinal cord pathology or an encephalopathy
Epileptic myoclonus is fairly common

Asterixis Negative myoclonus. A sudden brief loss of tone. Particularly associated with hepatic 
encephalopathy

Tardive dyskinesia A complication of dopamine antagonist neuroleptic medication
Abnormal movements may affect any body part, but usually mainly affect the face, lips, jaw and 
tongue

Tic Usually fairly small twitchy movements made semivoluntarily by a patient
Preceding urge to make the movement, and brief relief having done so
Often affect the face (blinks, grimaces, twitches of the nose), neck, shoulders
An individual may have one or several different tics

of sensory loss in spinal cord lesions which affect one 
side of the spinal cord or which affect either the 
anterior or posterior cord (see below).

With regard to the peripheral nervous system, 
cutaneous nerve fibres from dorsal root ganglia get 
to their end organs via spinal nerves, plexuses and 

Toes peripheral nerves. A lesion of an individual peripheral 
nerve or a plexus lesion or a spinal nerve or nerve 

Foot ex
Ind b root lesion gives rise to loss of cutaneous sensation 
Thum

Eyes in a particular distribution which is diagnostically 
Nose

very helpful (see Figs 16.15 and 16.16 and Table 
Face

16.3). The cutaneous area supplied by a spinal nerve 
Upper lip

is called a dermatome. Loss of cutaneous sensation 
Lips restricted to one dermatome indicates a spinal nerve 

Lower lip or nerve root lesion. Loss of cutaneous sensation in 
Teeth, gums and jaw all the dermatomes on both sides of the body below 

a particular level indicates a spinal cord lesion.
T Tongue

hroat and insi
I d
ntr of e

a-a  m
b ou
d th
om Cutaneous sensory examination

inal
By the time sensation is examined, it may be apparent 
from the history and the clinical examination thus 
far what the diagnosis is and consequently what needs 
to be looked for during sensory testing. This is 

Figure 16.14  Somatotopic representation in the primary sensory important because, in general, sensory testing needs 
cortex. to be goal directed; otherwise it tends to be fruitless 

Leg
Hip

Trunk
Neck
Head

Shoulder
Arm

Elbow
Forearm

Wrist
Hand

Little
M R

i i
d n
d g
le



340 16 Nervous system ﻿

Ophthalmic division V cranial

Maxillary division
Trigeminal

Mandibular division

Greater auricular C2, C3

C2

C3
Cervical plexus superficial branches

C4
Intercostal Lateral cutaneous br.
nerves
D2 – D11 Anterior cutaneous br. D2 C5

D3
D4

Axillary D5 D2
D6

Intercostobrachial D1
D7

Medial cutaneous

Musculocutaneous D8

D9
Brachial
plexus Posterior D10 C6

cutaneous
Radial D11 C7

Superficial
branch D12

C8

Median

Ulnar S2, 3

L2

Ilioinguinal

Genitofemoral
L3

Obturator

Sural
Lateral cutaneous

Lumbar Saphenous
plexus Femoral Anterior cutaneous

rami L4 Lateral plantar

Saphenous Tibial

Lateral plantar

Medial cutaneous

Medial plantar
Lateral cutaneous nerve of calf

Sacral Superficial and deep peroneal
plexus Sciatic

Sural
L5

Medial plantar S1

Figure 16.15  Anterior view to show the segmental innervation of the skin, i.e. the dermatomes (left) and the peripheral nerve supply 
(right). 



SECTION Three
341

Nervous system ﻿
Ophthalmic division
Maxillary division Trigeminal
Mandibular division

Mastoid branch C2, C3 Superficial
C2

Great auricular branch C2, C3 cervical plexus
C3

Occipital C2
C4 Occipital C3

Dorsal branches
C5 Occipital C4

Occipital C5–C8

Supraclavicular C3, C4

Dorsal rami of thoracic nerves
D4

Cutaneous branch of axillary
D5

D3 Lateral cutaneous branches
D6

of intercostal nerves
D2 D7

Medial and lateral
D8

D1 cutaneous branch of radial
D9

D10 Intercostobrachial
D11 Medial cutaneous

C6 D12 Dorsal rami of thoracic nerves
L1

C8 Musculocutaneous

C7 Dorsal cutaneous
L2 branch of ulnar

Anterior branch of radial

Median

L3

Gluteal branch of 12th intercostal
S3

Lateral branches of dorsal
rami of lumbar and sacral
Medial branches of dorsal

L5 S2
rami of L1–S6

L4 L3 Perforating branch of Pudendal
posterior cutaneous plexus

S1

Lateral
cutaneous

L5 L5 Obturator Lumbar
plexus

Medial cutaneous
L4 Femoral

Saphenous
S1 Posterior cutaneous Common

peroneal
Superficial peroneal

Sacral
Sural plexus
Lateral plantar

Tibial

Figure 16.16  Posterior view to show the segmental innervation of the skin, i.e. the dermatomes (left) and the peripheral nerve supply 
(right). 



342 16 Nervous system ﻿
or misleading. If a patient gives a very clear description Perception of heat and cold can be tested but in 
of impaired sensation in the distribution of, for routine clinical practice adds little. A patient with 
example, the ulnar nerve, diagnostically it makes little impaired thermal sensation caused by a cerebral 
difference whether he can or cannot feel sharp or spinal cord disorder will have impaired pin-
pinpricks in the area of his symptoms. The symptoms prick sensation in the same distribution. Impaired 
still suggest an ulnar neuropathy either way. With thermal sensation in patients with small fibre poly-
very few exceptions (the corneal reflex would be neuropathies is best assessed in a neurophysiology 
one), all sensory tests are subjective – in other words laboratory, but it does not contribute greatly to making 
the examiner relies on what the patient reports. the diagnosis.
Patients with no sensory symptoms may have signs 
suggesting impaired cutaneous sensation; in that Vibration sense
situation, the examiner has to exercise judgement as 
to whether they are of significance. Patients do not complain of impaired vibration sense, 

Disorganized sensory testing tends to confuse both but finding it on examination is a useful sign of either 
patient and examiner. With cutaneous sensory testing, a polyneuropathy or a spinal cord lesion. Vibration 
the goal is to see whether any hypoaesthesia conforms sensation is conveyed in large-diameter sensory 
to a meaningful pattern (see Table 16.13 and Figs 16.15 neurons, the central projections of which run in the 
and 16.16). Defining an area of hypoaesthesia is almost posterior columns of the spinal cord.
invariably better achieved by starting testing within the 
area of hypoaesthesia and moving the stimulus out into Testing vibration sense
areas where sensation is normally perceived. Set a low-frequency tuning fork vibrating noise-

One of the less satisfactory modalities of sensation lessly by striking it against the heel of your hand. 
to test is light touch. It is often done by dabbing the Then apply the base of the tuning fork to bony 
skin lightly with a piece of cotton wool, but there parts of the limbs and ask the patient to report 
may be differences between touching the skin and whether he feels the vibrations. Start distally and 
stroking it. Tickle is a different modality; moving work proximally if necessary. In the upper limb, 
hairs on hairy skin is different again. In the context start on a distal phalanx. If the patient has absence 
of spinal cord pathology, an abnormality of light of vibration sense there, then test the wrist and, if 
touch sensation will not differentiate a posterior necessary, the elbow. In the lower limb, test the distal 
column lesion from one affecting the spinothalamic phalanx of the big toe and then the medial malleolus 
tracts. When testing light touch sensation, it can be and top of the tibia, if necessary. If you suspect you 
helpful to ask the patient to close his eyes and then are getting false-positive answers from the patient, 
to report when he perceives the touches because ask him to close his eyes and then randomly apply 
some patients with anaesthesia will report that they the tuning fork either vibrating or not vibrating to 
feel touches when they see them being applied. his limb; the patient reports whether it is or is not 
Touch/pressure can be somewhat more rigorously vibrating.
assessed using a 10-gram monofilament to apply a 
standard quantity of pressure, and this can be useful Proprioception
as a screening test in situations where a patient is at 
risk of development of sensory peripheral neuropathy Impaired proprioception occurs in large-fibre sensory 
(e.g. diabetes). (or sensory and motor) polyneuropathies, spinal cord 

Pinprick testing is more informative diagnostically lesions affecting the posterior columns and in lesions 
and useful in mononeuropathies, polyneuropathies, at higher levels including lesions of the sensory cortex. 
radiculopathies and spinal cord lesions as well as Proprioceptive loss is the basis of sensory ataxia. 
brainstem and cerebral hemisphere lesions. It is, Patients with polyneuropathies which cause severe 
however, totally subjective. The patient reports proprioceptive loss have gait and limb ataxia which 
whether the pinprick has a sharp, slightly painful looks very much like cerebellar ataxia. There are 
quality or whether it is merely felt as a blunt touch. several clinical tests or signs which address propriocep-
Testing can be done with the patient looking. In some tion: joint position sense (more strictly joint movement 
clinical situations, it is worth testing pinprick sensation sense), pseudoathetosis and Romberg’s test.
even when a patient has no sensory symptoms. A 
patient with a spastic monoparesis of one leg could Testing joint position sense
have a brain or spinal cord lesion, but impaired Joint position testing does require the patient to look 
pinprick sensation in the contralateral leg would away or have his eyes closed. With the thumb and 
strongly suggest a spinal cord lesion (Brown-Séquard index finger of one hand, hold each side of the middle 
lesion, see below). A patient with a slowly progressive phalanx of the patient’s middle finger. With your 
spastic paraparesis or tetraparesis might have a other hand, grasp the sides of the distal phalanx. 
neurodegenerative disorder, but the finding of a Explain to the patient that he is to say which way 
clear-cut sensory level on the trunk or neck would his finger moves, that it will only go up or down and 
strongly suggest a structural spinal cord lesion. that the movements up or down will be random. 



SECTION Three
343

Nervous system ﻿
Move the distal phalanx either up or down through Cortical sensory loss
a small angle – the patient should be able to perceive 
as small a movement as you will be able to make. Cerebral hemisphere lesions may disrupt sensory 
Make sure each movement is random, not just up, afferents or the primary sensory cortex in such a way 
down, up, down, etc. If the patient fails to understand as to give rise to very straightforward sensory loss 
the test or to concentrate, do it first with him looking affecting the usually tested modalities. In the same 
at the joint being tested. If joint position sense is way that occipital lesions may give rise either to 
impaired at the distal interphalangeal joint, move visual loss or to disorders of visual interpretation, 
more proximally to the metacarpophalangeal joint parietal lesions can cause sensory impairment without 
and, if necessary, to the wrist or elbow, employing anaesthesia. One such disorder is sensory inattention 
bigger angles of movement. The same applies in the which is akin to visual inattention. A patient may 
foot and leg: start with the interphalangeal joint of feel sensory stimuli in limbs on the affected side, so 
the big toe and, if necessary, the ankle or knee. The does not have a hemianaesthesia, but sensory stimuli 
normal threshold for perception of joint movement presented simultaneously on both sides are registered 
in the toe is larger than in the finger. by the patient only on the normal side.

In tactile agnosia, a patient has no difficulty naming 
Pseudoathetosis an item shown to him, but with his eyes closed and 

the item put into his hand, he is unable to work out 
Patients with impaired joint position sense in their by its size, consistency and texture what it is. Similarly 
fingers may exhibit so-called pseudoathetosis: out- a patient may be unable to distinguish different very 
stretched fingers drift up or down or to the side when familiar coins by feel alone. Dysgraphaesthesia is 
the patient has his eyes closed. This is because, another form of cortical sensory impairment. Use an 
proprioception having failed, vision is the only means orange stick or a pen with the cap on. Write numbers 
by which the patient knows where his fingers are on the patient’s palm, clarifying with him which way 
and can keep them in one place (Fig. 16.17). up they are going to be. With eyes open, the patient 

will cope with 2, 3, 6, 1, etc. but will not recognize 
Romberg’s test the numbers with his eyes closed.
Ask the patient to stand with his feet together side by Clearly it is only valid to test these sorts of cortical 
side. Having established that his balance is satisfactory sensory impairments in patients who do not have a 
with his eyes open, ask him to close his eyes, having hemianaesthesia.
reassured him that nothing untoward will happen. 
If he loses balance with his eyes closed, the test Testing sensory inattention
is positive. You need to be prepared to catch the This is done with the patient’s eyes closed. Randomly 
patient if he shows signs of toppling. Sometimes touch lightly his right or left hand (or foot) or both 
this kind of proprioceptive loss is evident in the together, getting him to report each time whether 
clinical history – the patient comments on loss of he feels the touch on the right or left or on both 
balance in the dark or when he closes his eyes to wash sides. A patient who has right-left disorientation can 
his face. still do this test, indicating which side or sides were 

touched by a finger movement. The lesion responsible 
for sensory inattention may be in the parietal cortex 
or in the subcortical white matter.

Stretch tests
In patients with pain radiating into a leg as a result 
of a painful compressive radiculopathy, usually due 
to intervertebral disc prolapse, stretching the sciatic 
or femoral nerve may worsen the pain or bring it on. 
Straight leg raising with the patient lying on his back 
(see also Chapter 15) stretches the sciatic nerve and 
therefore the nerve roots which form it, and the test 
is most commonly positive in L4/L5 and L5/S1 disc 
protrusions causing L5 and S1 root lesions, respec-
tively. The femoral nerve stretch test is performed 
with the patient lying on his front. The knee is flexed 
fully on to the back of the thigh and the thigh is 
raised, extending the hip. Pain provoked in the anterior 

Figure 16.17  Paraneoplastic sensory neuropathy due to small thigh points to a L2/L3 or L3/L4 disc lesion (L3 or 
cell carcinoma of the lung. With the eyes closed, the patient’s L4 root lesion, respectively). As with so many other 
outstretched arms become flexed and abnormal postures develop tests, stretch tests are not specific. They can be positive 
in the fingers. in patients with painful inflammatory or infiltrative 



344 16 Nervous system ﻿
polyradiculopathies and false positives are not uncom- getting the patient to walk heel to toe. If relevant, 
mon in patients with a lot of back pain but no test for retropulsion (the pull test; see p. 338).
neurological disorder. Table 16.11 provides a summary of important kinds 

of neurological gait disorders. Sometimes it can be 
difficult to be certain that a patient with a frontal 

Posture and gait gait disorder does not also have PD. Patients with 
severe osteoarthritis of the hips sometimes have a 

In the outpatient setting, a patient’s gait will inevitably gait disorder which looks deceptively like a myopathic 
be observed, although it may well be desirable to gait. Finally, as in other domains, a functional gait 
inspect it in some detail, perhaps by taking him out disorder does not necessarily mean that there is no 
into a corridor. In hospitalized patients, it is easy to organic disease.
neglect to test gait if the patient is encountered in 
his bed. Mobility is so fundamental that gait must 
be considered and assessed in every appropriate patient Patterns of motor and sensory signs
and does not take long to do.

First, simply observe the patient standing. Look for Formulating the nature of the neurological problem 
abnormalities of posture. Established PD gives a and its localization on the basis of the signs requires 
kyphotic posture (Fig. 16.18). Neck extension weak- a combination of basic anatomical knowledge and 
ness causes forward flexion of the neck; in extreme pattern recognition. It is important to be able to 
cases, a state of drop head is apparent. Axial dystonia recognize the limitations of information the physical 
may be observed. Muscular dystrophy may be associ- signs convey in terms of localization. A patient with 
ated with hyperlordosis. Check the patient’s balance gait ataxia and extensor plantar reflexes and no other 
and do Romberg’s test (see above). Then ask the signs could have a lesion in the thoracic or cervical 
patient to walk a short distance, turn round and walk spinal cord or in the cerebellum with early brainstem 
back again. Mild gait ataxia can be brought out by compression, or it could be a diffuse cerebral process 

such as small vessel cerebrovascular disease or 
hydrocephalus. It may also be that two different 
lesions account for the two manifestations. Conversely, 
dysfunction affecting several different systems does 
not necessarily imply a multifocal disorder: diplopia, 
nystagmus, dysarthria, ataxia, upper motor neuron 
signs in the limbs, widespread sensory loss and impair-
ment of bladder control might be caused by multiple 
sclerosis, but a single brainstem lesion could equally 
account for all of the symptoms and signs.

In the following section, patterns of motor signs 
and patterns of sensory signs are outlined separately 
– and, of course, the examiner encounters them 
sequentially, but for many syndromes it is the char-
acteristic combination of motor and sensory features 
that allows accurate diagnosis.

Patterns of motor signs
Diagnosing lesions of individual motor or motor and 
sensory peripheral nerves requires knowledge of 
which muscles are supplied by which nerve; the same 
considerations apply to nerve root lesions. Plexus 
lesions can be difficult, particularly if patchy and 
multifocal, but can sometimes be diagnosed confi-
dently on clinical grounds simply from the anatomy. 
For example, a patient with a combination of what 
appears to be a radial nerve lesion and an axillary 
nerve lesion will have a lesion affecting the posterior 
cord of the brachial plexus.

Distal symmetrical weakness in the limbs would 
be typical for a generalized motor polyneuropathy. 

Figure 16.18  Parkinson’s disease, showing the typical rigid, The same pattern can be seen in distal myopathies 
flexed posture involving the trunk and limbs. The face is and some spinal muscular atrophies (hereditary motor 
impassive. neuronopathies), neither being common.



SECTION Three
345

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.11  Common gait disorders
Gait Characteristics
Myopathic (proximal, Hyperlordosis (axial and pelvic muscle weakness)
symmetrical myopathy) Waddling gait (weak gluteus medius muscles, among others, bilaterally)
High stepping or ‘steppage’ A consequence of foot drop (unilateral or bilateral) – common peroneal nerve lesion, motor 

polyneuropathy, e.g. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, distal myopathy
The leg has to be lifted abnormally high to make a step
With mild ankle dorsiflexion weakness, the foot slaps onto the ground as weight is 
transferred on to the heel

Ataxic Midline cerebellar lesion (cerebellar vermis): wide-based unsteady gait with irregular sized 
paces and potential to topple in any direction; there may be little or no limb incoordination
Cerebellar hemisphere lesion: the patient veers towards the side of the lesion; there is 
ipsilateral limb incoordination
Sensory ataxia: there may be limb and gait incoordination

Hemiparetic The spastic arm is held adducted at the shoulder with the elbow flexed and the forearm in 
front of the chest with flexion at the wrist and fingers
Swinging of the affected arm is reduced
The spastic leg is stiff with impaired knee flexion and ankle dorsiflexion, with abduction of 
the leg to bring the plantarflexed foot round and forward when taking a step 
(circumduction)

Spastic (paraparesis; Bilateral spastic legs
tetraparesis) Bilateral circumduction, such that the leading leg may end up adducted in front of the 

trailing leg – hence a ‘scissor gait’
Parkinsonian Kyphotic posture

Start hesitation
Initially small paces, which may get bigger
Acceleration of rate of steps once walking initiated (‘festinant gait’)
Reduced or absent arm swing unilaterally or bilaterally
May suddenly get stuck, e.g. in a doorway
Increased number of paces to turn round
Improvement of gait with visual cues on the ground

Frontal gait disorder Gait ignition failure
This term has a number of Start hesitation
mainly less satisfactory Small paces (but no acceleration)
synonyms, including gait Unsteadiness
apraxia, lower body Improvement of gait with visual cues on the ground
parkinsonism, atherosclerotic Prominent swinging of the arms
or vascular parkinsonism, Ability to use the legs to make cycling movements on a bed or in a chair, yet inability to 
marche à petits pas use legs to walk

Demyelinating polyneuropathies (Guillain-Barré Patients who have weakness and no sensory symp-
syndrome (GBS) being the most important) give rise toms or signs and no upper motor neuron signs usually 
to proximal as well as distal weakness, short nerves have muscle disorders or neuromuscular junction 
being as susceptible to conduction block as long ones. disorders (such as myasthenia gravis (MG), Lambert 
Hence, the presentation of GBS may be with exclu- Eaton myasthenic syndrome or botulism). Typically, 
sively ‘proximal’ and life-threatening weakness of MG affects the eyelids, eye muscles, face, jaw, muscles 
muscles of swallowing and breathing. of swallowing and breathing and axial and proximal 

Mainly proximal, symmetrical limb weakness should limb muscles, but atypical cases occur.
prompt consideration of myopathy, particularly 
polymyositis and dermatomyositis, and muscle disease Upper motor neuron disorders affecting the leg
secondary to metabolic or drug-induced disorders The lesion may be in the spinal cord or brain. Weak-
such as steroid myopathy, thyrotoxic myopathy and ness affects the flexor muscles more than extensor 
osteomalacic myopathy. Test getting out of a chair muscles; hence the abnormal findings are of weakness 
or rising from a crouch. The different muscular in hip flexion (iliopsoas), knee flexion (hamstrings) 
dystrophies tend to have particular patterns of muscle and ankle dorsiflexion (tibialis anterior). Spasticity 
involvement which may help diagnostically. usually predominates in the hip adductors and the 



346 16 Nervous system ﻿
extensor muscles of the leg and foot (gluteus maximus, question (see Table 16.13 and Figs 16.15 and 16.16). 
quadriceps and calf muscles). These circumstances In lesions affecting mixed nerves, sensory symptoms 
account for the characteristics of the hemiparetic with or without signs commonly precede motor 
and paraparetic gait (see Table 16.11). symptoms and signs. Thus, a clear description by a 

patient of sensory loss in ulnar nerve distribution 
Upper motor neuron disorders affecting the arm provides compelling evidence for an ulnar neuropathy 
and hand even if there are no signs. The right combination of 
Here the typical pattern is almost the opposite of motor and sensory signs allows the diagnosis of a 
that in the leg: weakness mainly affects deltoid and mononeuropathy to be made. Nerve conduction 
the extensors of the arm and hand – elbow extension studies and electromyography may contribute to the 
(triceps), wrist extensors and finger extensors. Spastic- assessment of the nature of the lesion (precise location, 
ity is mainly in the flexors (biceps and brachialis, extent of conduction block, extent of axonal damage, 
wrist flexors and finger flexors) and in forearm prona- subclinical involvement of other nerves, presence of 
tors. Thus, the typical posture of the arm in an an underlying subclinical polyneuropathy) but are 
ambulant patient with a hemiparesis is adduction at not necessary for making the diagnosis if there are 
the shoulder, flexion at the elbow, pronation of the clear-cut signs.
forearm and flexion of the wrist and fingers. Familiarity with the areas of cutaneous sensation 

The distribution of weakness in upper motor neuron mediated by nerve roots (dermatomes – see Figs 
lesions of the limbs is often referred to as ‘pyramidal’, 16.15 and 16.16) is important for two reasons. First, 
a useful but not completely accurate term. Table it enables lesions of individual nerve roots to be 
16.12 summarizes where in the CNS lesions need diagnosed. Second, the level of a spinal cord lesion 
to be to produce the various categories of upper can be ascertained to some extent (see below).
motor neuron lesions. Distal cutaneous sensory loss (touch, pinprick) in all 

four limbs, often in a ‘glove and stocking’ distribution, 
Patterns of sensory loss (Table 16.13) usually indicates a sensory polyneuropathy. Vibration 

sense and joint position sense may also be affected, and 
The diagnosis of lesions of individual sensory periph- loss of reflexes, particularly the ankle reflexes, provides 
eral nerves or the sensory component of mixed nerves strong clinical support for a diagnosis of sensory 
requires knowledge of anatomy, in this case the area polyneuropathy. Cervical spinal cord lesions sometimes 
of cutaneous sensation mediated by the nerve in produce quite widespread sensory symptoms in both 

Table 16.12  Localization of upper motor neuron lesions
Pattern of weakness Site of lesion
Spastic monoparesis Cerebral hemisphere

Arm (and face) – MCA territory
Leg – ACA territory
Brown-Séquard syndrome in thoracic cord gives a monoparesis of the ipsilateral leg

Spastic paraparesis Thoracic spinal cord lesion (i.e. above lumbar cord, but below cervical cord)
A parasagittal meningioma in the falx between the cerebral hemispheres affecting the motor cortex 
for the leg bilaterally is a much quoted but rare cause of a paraparesis

Spastic hemiparesis A large hemisphere lesion, e.g. MCA territory stroke, but the arm will be worse affected than the leg
A lesion of the internal capsule
(Pure motor hemiplegia is a lacunar syndrome)
A brainstem lesion affecting the corticospinal tract on one side
Brown-Séquard syndrome in the high cervical spinal cord

Spastic tetraparesis High cervical spinal cord lesion, e.g. C3/C4 disc
Diffuse bilateral cerebral hemisphere disease affecting motor pathways bilaterally, e.g. small 
vessel cerebrovascular disease
Hydrocephalus
Brainstem disease affecting the corticospinal tracts bilaterally, e.g. basilar artery territory stroke 
(which causes locked-in syndrome)

‘Cortical hand’ A small lesion in the primary motor cortex subserving the hand
Weakness and difficulty using the hand but little or no spasticity

‘Cortical foot’ A small lesion in the primary motor cortex subserving the foot
Weakness and difficulty using the foot but little or no spasticity

ACA, anterior cerebral artery; MCA, middle cerebral artery.



SECTION Three
347

Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.13  Patterns of sensory loss
Clinical sensory findings Site of lesion
Hemianaesthesia (all modalities) Parietal cortex or subcortical white matter (corona radiata)
Incomplete, e.g. face and arm Thalamus or internal capsule
Complete Pure sensory stroke is a lacunar syndrome
Crossed sensory deficit: loss of cutaneous Lateral medullary syndrome: lesion of spinal tract and nucleus of trigeminal 
sensation on one side of the face and loss ipsilateral to the facial sensory loss, and of crossed spinothalamic tract
of spinothalamic tract-mediated sensation 
on the other side of the body
Cape or half-cape distribution of dissociated Central cord lesion: syringomyelia (and syringobulbia if there is no upper 
suspended sensory loss (spinothalamic, with level but the sensory loss affects the face)
an upper and a lower level) with preserved 
proprioception and vibration sense
Loss of all modalities below a dermatomal Transverse spinal cord lesion affecting posterior columns and 
level on legs (rare), trunk or neck spinothalamic tracts

Cord compression by tumour, cord trauma, severe myelitis
As above but with sacral sparing of A severe intramedullary spinal cord lesion, e.g. tumour, bleed, but with 
cutaneous sensory loss sparing of the outermost spinothalamic fibres which come from sacral 

dermatomes
Brown-Séquard syndrome: loss of Hemisection of the spinal cord: involvement of the posterior columns 
spinothalamic sensation on one side,  (uncrossed) and spinothalamic tract (crossed) on one side
with a level, and loss of vibration and The lesion is on the side with the proprioceptive loss
proprioception in affected limbs on the other Cord compression (tumour, disc), myelitis (e.g. multiple sclerosis), cord 
side trauma
Anterior spinal artery syndrome Infarction affecting the anterior (ventral) thoracic spinal cord

Involvement of spinothalamic tracts bilaterally
Posterior columns spared
If the infarction extends down to the lumbar spinal cord, the lower limb 
reflexes are lost
Otherwise they become brisk because of the paraplegia caused by bilateral 
corticospinal tract involvement

Radicular distribution of cutaneous sensory Radiculopathy
loss One of the clinical problems is that the distribution for nerve roots and 

individual peripheral nerves can be similar, e.g. C5 and axillary nerve, L4 
and saphenous, L5 and common peroneal

Extensive sensory loss in one limb, not Consider a plexopathy (brachial or lumbar)
accounted for by a nerve root or a peripheral The motor features are likely to predominate
nerve
Sensory loss in the distribution of individual Mononeuropathy
sensory or sensory and motor nerves Entrapment neuropathies of mixed nerves may present with sensory 

features only, or with motor and sensory features, which makes clinical 
diagnosis easier
For some nerves, you have to rely solely on clinical acumen – the nerve is 
not amenable to neurophysiological investigation, e.g. lateral cutaneous 
nerve of the thigh

Distal sensory loss in limbs Polyneuropathy – classically ‘glove and stocking’ but may be much less 
marked (toes only) or much more marked, only sparing the back close to  
the spine
Multifocal polyneuropathies have features of a multiplicity of 
mononeuropathies



348 16 Nervous system ﻿
hands which might make one think of peripheral 
nerve pathology, but the motor signs in the legs and 
possibly autonomic manifestations (sexual dysfunction, 
impaired bladder and bowel control) ought to clarify 
the situation. However, rarely, cervical spinal cord 
lesions can also give rise to distal lower limb sensory 
symptoms which can be misleading.

Spinal cord and cauda equina lesions Hyperpathia
The characteristic sensory disturbance associated with 
compression of the cauda equina or spinal cord is 
one of loss of all modalities of sensation below the 
level of the compression. If the compression is of the 
cauda equina (e.g. a big central posterior intervertebral 
disc prolapse), all nerve roots below and possibly at 
the level of the lesion will be affected, including the 
buttocks and perineum. A severe spinal cord lesion 
(often compression, but any process which functionally 
transects the cord at one site) will result in a sensory 
level on the trunk (abdomen and back, or chest, Impaired pain Impaired light

including the arms if the lesion is between C5 and and temperature touch and
sense vibration sense

T1 spinal cord level) or on the neck. Knowledge of 
the anatomy of the dermatomes allows the spinal 
cord level (not the same as the spinal column level) 
to be determined. In spinal cord lesions of mild to 
moderate severity, the sensory level (which is less 
dense than in severe lesions) is some distance below 
the spinal cord level of the lesion. As the lesion 
evolves, the patient develops progressively worse 
sensory symptoms, first perceived at a level well 
below that of the lesion but which then extend up Increased tendon
towards the level of the lesion. This process may not reflexes in left
have been completed at the time the patient is evalu- leg and extensor
ated and can sometimes lead to the wrong part of plantar response

the spinal cord being imaged. Figure 16.19  Brown-Séquard syndrome. Note the distribution of 
corticospinal, posterior column and lateral spinothalamic tract 

Brown-Séquard syndrome signs. The cord lesion is on the left side. 

Brown-Séquard syndrome refers to the signs resulting 
from a focal lesion affecting the right or left half of the 
spinal cord, such as an intramedullary inflammatory or Central spinal cord lesion  
an extramedullary compressive lesion. Disruption of (especially syringomyelia)
the descending corticospinal tract on the affected side A syrinx is a pathological tube-shaped cavity in the 
results in an ipsilateral upper motor neuron disorder spinal cord, usually cervical and extending down into 
below the level of the lesion (commonly in one leg the thoracic area. It expands the spinal cord, but 
but a high cervical lesion would affect the arm as ascending and descending long tracts are unimpaired 
well). Involvement of the posterior columns on the except in extreme cases. Anterior horn cells are 
affected side results in ipsilateral loss of vibration damaged, leading to the motor manifestations of 
sense and joint position sense in the leg or arm and wasting and weakness of muscles in the arms and 
leg below the lesion. The spinothalamic tracts on hands. Tendon reflex pathways are affected leading 
the side of the lesion are affected, but sensory input to upper limb reflex loss. There may be abnormalities 
into the spinothalamic tracts comes from pain and of autonomic control of blood vessels and sweating 
temperature afferents on the opposite side which in affected limbs. Most remarkable, however, are the 
cross over on entering the spinal cord, so loss of patterns of sensory impairment. The classical findings 
pinprick and temperature sensation occurs below are described by two adjectives: the sensory loss is 
the level of the lesion on the opposite side (Fig. dissociated; and a sensory level is found which is 
16.19). Some patients with mild lesions comment suspended. Dissociated sensory loss denotes loss of 
that while it is one leg which drags and feels weak pain and temperature sensation with preservation 
and stiff, it is the other leg which has impaired of vibration and proprioception. The central cord 
sensation. lesion interrupts the sensory afferents which cross 



SECTION Three
349

Nervous system ﻿
the middle of the spinal cord from dorsal roots on large lesion, such as a middle cerebral artery territory 
one side to spinothalamic tracts on the other side. ischaemic stroke affecting the whole of the primary 
Sensory afferents proceeding directly from dorsal roots sensory cortex, will have the same effect. Smaller 
into posterior columns are unaffected. Spinothalamic lesions in sensory cortex will affect sensation (all 
afferents which have already crossed below the lower modalities) in only part of one side of the body.
limit of the lesion are also unaffected. This dictates 
that the loss of pinprick sensation will have an upper 
level corresponding approximately to the top of the Cognitive function
syrinx, but there will also be a lower level, usually 
on the trunk, so the sensory loss is suspended by There is a risk in neurological examination that 
comparison with the situation in lesions affecting the cognition may be neglected. It is a useful simplification 
spinothalamic tracts themselves (such as complete to divide domains of cognition into those which are 
transverse cord lesions, the Brown-Séquard lesion or distributed and those which are localized. The ana-
anterior spinal artery territory spinal cord infarction). tomical substrates of distributed cognitive functions 

are bilateral and widespread in the brain. An implica-
Anterior spinal artery territory spinal  tion is that a single focal neurological lesion will have 
cord infarction little perceptible impact on that function. In contrast, 

a focal lesion in a particular place will have a major 
A major component of the arterial supply to much effect on a localized cognitive function.
of the cord, particularly the thoracic spinal cord, The two major syndromes of cognitive impairment, 
comes from the anterior spinal artery, which receives which may be accompanied by no neurological signs, 
its main blood supply via the artery of Adamkiewicz are dementia and delirium. They are covered in 
from the thoracic aorta. Spinal cord infarction is Chapter 7. In this section, emphasis is placed on 
uncommon; when it occurs, it is usually the thoracic cognitive deficits which, to some extent, have local-
cord which is affected. Occlusion of the artery of izing value and which may be seen in patients with 
Adamkiewicz may be atherosclerotic, arteritic or focal cerebral lesions as well as those with more 
consequent upon dissection of the aorta. The result generalized neurodegenerative disorders.
is infarction of the anterior (ventral) half of the spinal 
cord over a variable length. The corticospinal tracts Amnesia
are involved bilaterally, resulting in abrupt-onset 
paraplegia. The major autonomic manifestations are Memory is a distributed cognitive function. Dense 
loss of bladder and bowel control. The spinothalamic amnesia requires bilateral hemisphere lesions, but 
tracts are affected on both sides of the cord. Thus, those lesions may be very focal – bilateral thalamic 
there is dense loss of pinprick sensation with a sensory infarction or damage to the mamillothalamic tracts 
level on the trunk. The striking feature, in a numb in Wernicke’s encephalopathy can cause devastating 
paraplegic individual, is preservation of sensation amnesia – and the anatomy of memory in each 
mediated by the posterior columns – intact vibration hemisphere is localized and well defined. Furthermore, 
and joint position sense in the toes and feet. unilateral lesions, such as a posterior cerebral artery 

occlusion causing temporal lobe infarction, do have 
Patterns of sensory loss in lesions of  discernible effects on memory. Normal episodic 
the medulla memory (memory of events which have been person-
In the midbrain, pons and medulla, so many nuclei ally experienced) depends on integrity of the hip-
and nerve tracts are found in such restricted anatomi- pocampi and entorhinal cortex in the temporal lobes, 
cal confines that inevitably the clinical manifestations the fornices, the thalami and the mamillary bodies. 
resulting from small lesions in different parts vary Anterior temporal lobes subserve semantic memory 
substantially. Considering sensation in isolation, a (memory for facts, learning and general knowledge). 
lesion of the lateral medulla on one side may affect Verbal memory is dependent on the left temporal 
the spinothalamic tract on that side conveying pain lobe, visual memory on the right temporal lobe. Some 
sensation from the contralateral side of the body and, important causes of amnesia are listed in Table 16.14. 
at the same time, affect the spinal tract and nucleus Amnesia emerges mainly from the history taken from 
of the trigeminal nerve, which mediates pain on the an informant rather than from the patient. Episodic 
ipsilateral side of the face. memory may be assessed by testing recall of a name 

and address that the patient has registered and by 
Hemianaesthesia testing the patient’s recall of events from his past, 

both recent and distant.
A lesion affecting the sensory afferent pathways 
rostral to the principal sensory nucleus of the trigemi- Dysphasia
nal nerve in the pons (i.e. in the midbrain, diencepha-
lon, thalamus or internal capsule) will result in a Dysphasia or aphasia is an acquired disorder of 
hemianaesthesia: loss of sensation on the whole of language function. The auditory processing of language 
one side of the body including the head and face. A involves the superior temporal gyri bilaterally. The 



350 16 Nervous system ﻿

Table 16.14  Some causes of amnesia
Cause Comment
Acute
Transient global amnesia The name describes well what happens; the pathology remains obscure; imaging 

indicates a hippocampal process
Transient epileptic amnesia Here amnesia is the seizure
Epilepsy more generally Temporal lobe seizures may involve amnesia; postictal amnesia follows any 

generalized convulsion
Closed head injury Concussion involves retrograde and anterograde post-traumatic amnesia
Drugs: benzodiazepines, alcohol Amnesia can occur without significant impairment of alertness
Chronic
Hippocampal damage
Herpes simplex encephalitis Bilateral temporal lobe damage
Limbic encephalitis Bilateral temporal lobe damage
Cerebral anoxia
Temporal lobectomy with a lesion Should not happen in modern practice because of improvements in preoperative 
in the other temporal lobe assessment
Bilateral posterior cerebral artery 
territory infarction
Closed head injury Bilateral temporal lobe damage is common
Early Alzheimer’s disease Later there are other prominent cognitive deficits as well
Diencephalic damage
Korsakoff’s syndrome This is what results from untreated Wernicke’s encephalopathy, due to thiamine 

deficiency
Third ventricular tumours and cysts Potentially affecting the fornices and thalami bilaterally
Bilateral thalamic infarction Either two separate events or, if the bilateral paramedian thalamosubthalamic arteries 

of Percheron branch from one common vessel (a not uncommon variant), one stroke
Subarachnoid haemorrhage from 
anterior communicating artery 
aneurysm

The list on the left is adapted from John R. Hodges 1994 Cognitive Assessment for Clinicians, Oxford University Press.

meaning of words requires the dominant temporal cause of dysphasia is dominant hemisphere stroke, 
lobe. The planning of speech production occurs in but any appropriately placed focal lesion may cause 
the dominant frontal lobe (including Broca’s area in dysphasia, and it is an important feature of neuro-
the inferior frontal lobe). The motor control of speech degenerative dementias.
production depends on the sensorimotor cortex 
bilaterally. In routine practice, four major parameters Apraxia
of language can be used to assess dysphasia: fluency, 
comprehension, repetition and naming skills. Naming This term refers to an inability to do things in spite 
skills are affected in all forms of dysphasia. Dominant of having intact motor and sensory systems. Dressing 
frontal lobe lesions are likely to give rise to a non- apraxia, an inability to put on items of clothing, 
fluent dysphasia characterized by effortful speech particularly jackets and gowns, is seen in patients 
and a poverty of language but with comprehension with non-dominant parietal lesions. Visuospatial 
intact, while lesions in Wernicke’s area (posterior disabilities and neglect contribute to this form of 
superior dominant temporal lobe) result in impairment apraxia. Constructional apraxia likewise reflects 
of comprehension but with fluent speech that conveys impaired visuospatial function. The main form of 
rather little meaning. Global aphasia occurs as a result motor apraxia (ideomotor apraxia) manifests as dif-
of large dominant hemisphere lesions of the frontal, ficulty using instruments and tools (toothbrush, 
temporal and parietal lobe. Dysphasia is often associ- scissors, etc.) in spite of knowing what the device in 
ated with dyslexia and dysgraphia. A severe compre- question is. Other manifestations of ideomotor apraxia 
hension deficit as a result of dysphasia makes it include inability to carry out actions such as waving 
challenging to assess other aspects of cognition goodbye or saluting, inability to mime actions (e.g. 
although they may be intact. The most common using a comb to comb one’s hair, hammering a nail) 



SECTION Three
351

Nervous system ﻿
and to copy finger and hand positions demonstrated degenerative, neoplastic). This can often seem bewil-
by the examiner. This form of apraxia usually occurs dering for students and doctors in training. In addition 
in dominant parietal lesions. An apraxic individual to those points made above regarding the identification 
may be unable to make a cup of tea, but agnosia (see of muscle disorders, neuromuscular junction disorders, 
below) might give rise to the same inability. Further- mononeuropathies, polyneuropathies, radiculopathies 
more, a test for apraxia which requires a sequence and spinal cord disorders, the following are some 
of actions probes comprehension, memory and helpful principles regarding brainstem, cerebellar and 
executive skills as well as praxis. Patients with domi- cerebral hemisphere lesions.
nant inferior frontal lobe lesions may have apraxia If a patient has a hemiparesis and a hemianaesthesia 
affecting the use of lips, tongue and mouth, often in on the same side, the lesion has to be above the decus-
association with a non-fluent dysphasia. Gait apraxia sation of the corticospinal tracts in the medulla. The 
is covered in Table 16.11. lesion is most likely to be in the contralateral cerebral 

hemisphere but could also be in the brainstem.
Agnosia The range of possible manifestations of brainstem 

lesions is extensive, but a good general rule is that a 
Agnosia is a failure of recognition. A simple clas- cranial nerve lesion (III, V, VI, VII, VIII, X or XII) 
sification is by the sensory modality affected: visual, on one side and long tract signs on the other side of 
auditory, tactile, olfactory. There is overlap between the body indicate a brainstem lesion. The long tract 
tactile agnosia and cortical sensory loss. Visual agnosia signs may be motor, sensory or both. A brainstem 
(potentially the most severely disabling agnosia) reflects lesion has to be considered if there are bilateral long 
visuoperceptual impairment due to occipitoparietal tract signs and the lesion is above neck level. Nys-
and occipitotemporal lesions which are often bilateral tagmus and long-tract signs indicate a brainstem 
and may be associated with a visual field defect but lesion. Vertical gaze paresis of acute onset and 
basic visual function in the preserved field is intact. A internuclear ophthalmoparesis are indicators of 
patient with visual agnosia may not recognize a watch midbrain and pontine lesions, respectively. Extensive 
until it is put into his hand but would answer correctly brainstem lesions affecting the reticular formation 
the question ‘What do you wear on your wrist and will cause coma. A basilar artery thrombosis may 
use to tell the time?’ Prosopagnosia is an inability spare the dorsal brainstem such that consciousness 
to recognize familiar faces (though parts of the face is preserved but the devastating consequence is the 
are correctly identified, and the patient may be able locked-in syndrome.
to match correctly two different photographs of the Cerebellar lesions should be suspected with com-
face he cannot recognize). Bilateral occipitotemporal binations of gait ataxia, limb ataxia, dysarthria and 
lesions underlie prosopagnosia. nystagmus. Ataxia by itself is rather non-localizing, 

being a feature of polyneuropathy and spinal cord, 
Neglect phenomena cerebellar, brainstem and cerebral hemisphere disease. 
A lesion in either hemisphere may lead to a form of Remember that anyone who is vertiginous will be 
neglect affecting the opposite side, but neglect is ataxic until the vertigo settles, so ataxia in combination 
much more commonly seen when the lesion is in with vertigo may be due to a peripheral vestibular 
the right cerebral hemisphere, affecting the left side. rather than a neurological disorder. Cerebellar mass 
Usually the lesion is large, such as a stroke. Different lesions readily compress the brainstem which com-
forms of neglect may have different localizations. plicates the signs and, moreover, brainstem compres-
Parietal lobe involvement is often prominent. A patient sion readily causes hydrocephalus.
with neglect of personal space may pay no attention Common manifestations in large unilateral cerebral 
to the affected side of the body, in the extreme even hemisphere lesions include contralateral hemianopia, 
denying that the affected side belongs to him. Denial horizontal gaze paresis, hemiparesis and hemianaes-
of a hemiplegia is anosognosia; unconcern about a thesia together with cognitive impairment (dysphasia 
hemiplegia is anosodiaphoria. Neglect of extrapersonal in dominant hemisphere lesions, neglect and visuos-
space leads to failure to eat the food off one side of patial problems in non-dominant). A frontal lobe 
a plate, failure to complete one side of a drawing, lesion affecting prefrontal structures may give rise to 
failure to read the left side of a text, even failure to behavioural and cognitive deficits only. Anterior 
write the first part of a word. Sensory and visual cerebral artery territory ischaemic strokes cause spastic 
inattention are forms of neglect. paresis in the contralateral leg. Middle cerebral artery 

territory ischaemic strokes cause all of the features 
of large unilateral hemisphere lesions. The hemiparesis 

Localizing the neurological lesion is maximal in the face and arm. Posterior cerebral 
artery territory ischaemic strokes cause hemianopia 

Having taken a history and undertaken a neurological because of occipital lobe infarction and cause cognitive 
and relevant general medical examination, it is deficits due to involvement of the temporal lobe.
important to decide where the likely lesion is and, The clinical manifestations of hydrocephalus depend 
ideally, its likely nature (e.g. vascular, inflammatory, on how acutely it develops. Acute hydrocephalus 



352 16 Nervous system ﻿
causes headache, papilloedema, drowsiness and coma. there is an identifiable structural cause for the epilepsy. 
In the setting of established hydrocephalus, acute Electroencephalography (EEG) in this situation is 
exacerbations cause hydrocephalic attacks, which may less useful. In the paediatric/adolescent age group, 
manifest with abrupt headache, paralysis, drop attacks imaging is usually normal but the EEG may well be 
and coma. In some cases, however, hydrocephalus informative (see below).
occurs with hardly any raised pressure at all. In such 
cases, the manifestations are cognitive impairment, Stroke
ataxia, urinary incontinence, upgaze paresis and exten- Imaging is central to the investigation of stroke and 
sor plantar reflexes. Hydrocephalus is a common transient ischaemic attacks. The advent of thrombolysis 
cause of bilateral long-tract (corticospinal tract) signs and the possibility of other forms of emergency 
of cerebral origin. The other is diffuse or multifocal treatment of ischaemic stroke mandates extremely 
bilateral white matter disease, which may be ischaemic rapid but accurate diagnosis of stroke and of stroke 
or inflammatory. Large supratentorial mass lesions severity. CT, including CT angiography, and MRI 
ultimately cause bilateral long tract signs, pupillary both contribute.
changes and impending coma due to brain herniation.

Focal central nervous system lesions

Investigations All focal CNS lesions will require imaging. Usually 
MRI is preferable to CT, but the choice may be 

It is crucial for investigations in neurological practice dependent on local resources. It is crucial, by means 
to be focused and directed on the basis of the clinical of the clinical methods outlined above, to decide 
findings. Imaging, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examina- where the focal lesion is, so as to image the appropriate 
tion and neurophysiological investigations may all part of the nervous system. This is particularly true 
play a role in diagnosis. of spinal imaging.

Multiple sclerosis
Imaging All patients presenting for the first time with mani-
Headache festations of multiple sclerosis (often but not always 

the first attack) must have a MRI head scan, and 
A discussion about which patients with headache imaging of the spinal cord may be necessary.
should be imaged is beyond the scope of this chapter, 
but a number of points are worth noting: Cognitive impairment
■	 Migraine, tension-type headaches, medication As a rule all patients with cognitive impairment 

overuse headaches and post-traumatic should have structural imaging of the brain. Metabolic 
headaches can be diagnosed with a high degree imaging contributes and molecular imaging (e.g. of 
of accuracy without scans. amyloid) will soon become a clinical tool.

■	 Normal scans undoubtedly reassure worried 
patients with headaches, but incidental Peripheral nervous system
abnormalities found on scans risk perpetuating 
worry. MRI is the investigation for radiculopathies. MRI also 

has a role in the investigation of plexus lesions but 
■	 Normal scans do not cure headaches (though a 

proportion of patients who know their scan is imaging of the brachial plexus remains problematic. 
normal do not attend their follow-up The vast majority of compressive mononeuropathies 
appointment). are not imaged, but consideration should be given 

to imaging (MRI, ultrasound) in certain progressive 
■	 Patients with serious intracranial disorders rarely 

just have headache. and severe mononeuropathies to look for tumours 
and cysts.

■	 Occasionally migraine really is ‘symptomatic’, 
i.e. caused by a structural intracranial disorder. Muscle diseases

Computed tomography (CT) remains a good 
investigation for headache in the emergency setting, MRI has a role in the investigation of muscle disorders, 
to image large tumours, particularly supratentorial contributing to the assessment of some patients 
tumours, abscesses, brain swelling, hydrocephalus and with dystrophies or inflammatory muscle disease, 
haemorrhage, particularly subarachnoid haemorrhage. particularly in guiding the decision as to which muscle 
However, the radiation dose is the equivalent of 200 to biopsy.
chest X-rays so, if available, magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) is preferable, especially in an elective Electroencephalography
setting. Electrodes applied to the patient’s scalp pick up small 

changes of electrical potential which, after amplifica-
Epilepsy tion, are recorded on paper or displayed on a video 
The investigation of choice for late-onset epilepsy is monitor and recorded electronically. The main use 
a MRI head scan; the information required is whether of EEG is in diagnosing the nature of the epilepsy 



SECTION Three
353

Nervous system ﻿
in young patients (particularly in distinguishing (axonal, demyelinating, multifocal, small fibre). NCS 
generalized from focal epilepsies), but it has significant and EMG are helpful in suspected disorders of 
limitations since, in the majority of cases, what is neuromuscular junctions. EMG helps in the diagnosis 
recorded is an interictal EEG which may or may not of myopathy and is an important test for patients 
show diagnostically useful abnormalities. EEG is a with undiagnosed weakness.
poor test in individuals who have undiagnosed attacks 
of symptoms which might be epilepsy. Video telemetry Cerebrospinal fluid examination
is invaluable in clarifying whether attacks are epileptic 
or non-epileptic, the main limitation being that the CSF is usually obtained by lumbar puncture (LP), 
attack frequency has to be high enough to make it which is uncomfortable, invasive and attended by a 
likely that attacks will be recorded. number of potential complications, the most common 

EEG may be a useful investigation in encephalo- one being post-lumbar puncture headache. There 
pathic states where the clinical picture may be one is a risk of death from brain herniation when LP 
of delirium. Here, EEG can identify non-convulsive is undertaken in a patient with raised intracranial 
status epilepticus or point to a diagnosis of encephalitis pressure due to a mass lesion or obstructive hydro-
as opposed to a toxic or metabolic encephalopathy. cephalus. Papilloedema, any grade of impaired level of 
It has a supportive role in diagnosing Creutzfeldt- consciousness or any focal neurological signs mandate 
Jakob disease. brain imaging before consideration of LP and it is 

contraindicated in patients with mass lesions and 
Nerve conduction studies and obstructive hydrocephalus. However, it is an essential 

electromyography investigation in patients with papilloedema due to 
suspected raised intracranial pressure who have a 

Sensory nerve conduction studies (NCS) are achieved normal good quality MRI, to pursue the possibility 
by stimulating electrically a purely sensory nerve of idiopathic intracranial hypertension and to exclude 
percutaneously and recording, usually by surface low-grade chronic meningitis, as well as to treat the 
electrodes, the resulting sensory action potentials raised pressure. Pressure measurement as well as CSF 
(SAPs) in the relevant nerve either more proximally analysis will be required.
or distally. The SAP amplitude and conduction velocity 
are measured. Motor NCS require stimulation of a Meningitis
motor or mixed nerve, recording the resulting motor The single circumstance in which LP is an emergency 
action potentials from a muscle supplied by the nerve, investigation is CNS infection, particularly meningitis. 
again usually with surface electrodes. Stimulation of There is controversy as to whether CSF examination 
the nerve at two different sites allows calculation of in meningitis is really necessary or at least whether 
the conduction velocity between the two sites. the risk is worth taking. In adult neurology, the 
Electromyography (EMG) entails recording electrical consensus remains that CSF should be obtained if 
activity generated by muscle fibres and motor units possible but that, in cases of suspected pyogenic 
(groups of muscle fibres supplied by a single motor bacterial meningitis, there must be no delay in starting 
neuron) at rest and during contraction, using a needle antibiotic treatment pending cranial imaging. Thus, 
electrode inserted into the muscle. Different abnor- if there is no contraindication to LP, it should be 
malities of EMG arise in denervation, disorders of performed expeditiously immediately after clinical 
neuromuscular transmission and disorders of muscle assessment and obtaining blood cultures, in order to 
itself. NCS contributes to the diagnosis of many but provide a microbiological diagnosis. If cranial imaging 
not all entrapment neuropathies. It has to be anatomi- is necessary, treatment should start directly after 
cally possible to stimulate and record from the nerve clinical assessment and blood cultures. CSF obtained 
proximal to the entrapment site. In patients with after imaging has shown that LP is expected to be 
clear physical signs, NCSs are not needed to make safe may still be diagnostic even some hours after 
the correct clinical diagnosis but may help in the treatment has started.
assessment of severity and prognosis. Every patient CSF examination is important, sometimes critical, 
who is going to have surgical decompression of an in diagnosis of all forms of infective meningitis: 
entrapped peripheral nerve should have an NCS. bacterial, tuberculous, yeast, fungal and viral. The 
NCS is invaluable in confirming the suspected key parameters are the white cell count, the types 
diagnosis of nerve entrapment when there are no of white cells (polymorphonuclear neutrophil white 
definite signs, a common circumstance in carpal tunnel cells, lymphocytes), the CSF glucose concentration 
syndrome. (low in bacterial meningitis) which must be compared 

NCS and EMG may contribute to the assessment with a simultaneous blood glucose concentration, 
of plexopathies and radiculopathies though, in the microscopy for microorganisms (Gram stain, tuber-
latter, the combination of careful clinical evaluation culosis stain, India ink preparation for cryptococci), 
and imaging should suffice. NCS and EMG help to DNA analysis for viral and bacterial DNA (using 
confirm a diagnosis of polyneuropathy and provide polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques) and 
information about the nature of polyneuropathies appropriate microbiological culture. The CSF protein 



354 16 Nervous system ﻿
concentration is of some importance and the CSF scan lesions are inflammatory or ischaemic, or reflect 
lactate concentration may be helpful. some other pathology. CSF protein electrophoresis to 

CSF analysis is also urgent in encephalitis, which will detect oligoclonal IgG immunoglobulins is the most 
be treated as herpes simplex encephalitis until CSF sensitive test to provide evidence of chronic inflam-
PCR tests for herpes simplex virus have proved negative. matory CNS demyelination. Occasionally in suspected 
CSF examination in myelitis will follow imaging. MS results of CSF examination are incompatible with 

In all other situations, CSF examination is not so a diagnosis of MS because of either a very high cell 
urgent, even if it is still essential. In low-grade men- count or a very high protein concentration, mandating 
ingitis which is suspected to be due to tuberculosis, a revision of the diagnosis.
to maximize the chance of identifying and culturing 
mycobacteria send up to three CSF samples on Guillain-Barré syndrome
consecutive days before starting treatment. A high CSF protein concentration without a high 

cell count is characteristic of Guillain-Barré syndrome 
Subarachnoid haemorrhage (GBS), but this takes time to develop so will not be 
In suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage with cranial found if the CSF is examined early in the course of 
imaging that does not show evidence of blood in the the condition. Every patient with GBS should have 
subarachnoid space, CSF must be examined. It is CSF looked at in order to make sure that the patient 
important to wait until 12 hours after the suspected does not have a rapidly progressive polyradiculopathy 
bleed so that red blood cells will have lysed and due to diffuse neoplastic leptomeningeal infiltration. 
haemoglobin will have undergone metabolism to Accordingly, when the LP is done, care should be 
oxyhaemoglobin and bilirubin, which can be detected taken to order cytology as well as a cell count, blood 
by spectroscopy or seen with the naked eye as and CSF glucose concentration, protein concentration 
xanthochromia. Failure to allow time for xanthochro- and, if appropriate, culture.
mia to develop makes it impossible to distinguish a 
traumatic CSF tap from bloodstained CSF due to Neoplastic leptomeningeal infiltration
subarachnoid haemorrhage. Neoplastic leptomeningeal infiltration, either by a 

haematological malignancy (leukaemia, lymphoma) 
CNS inflammatory disorders or metastatic carcinoma (lung, breast, others) may 
CSF lymphocytosis is usually a feature of conditions present as a cranial neuropathy or spinal polyradicu-
such as CNS vasculitis, neurosarcoidosis, Behçet’s lopathy or with headache, encephalopathy or 
disease and sometimes systemic lupus erythematosus. hydrocephalus. High-protein and low-glucose con-

With regard to multiple sclerosis (MS), if the clinical centrations in CSF are typical but not diagnostic. The 
features and MRI appearances are typical (particularly presence of malignant cells in the CSF is diagnostic, 
in a young patient), CSF examination may not be but they are not always seen. Sending serial samples 
necessary. It remains important if scans do not fulfil on consecutive days (up to three) increases the chance 
diagnostic criteria or if there is ambiguity as to whether of a positive result.



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Urogenital system 17 
John Peters, James Green and Lina Hijazi

The diagnostic process in nephrology  lower urinary tract infection due to cystitis or ure-
thritis. Such pain is frequently accompanied by 

and urology dysuria, frequency or strangury (painful micturition). 
These symptoms comprise the syndrome of cystitis. 

Nephrology and urology systems are more dependent It is nearly always associated with urinary abnormali-
than most on laboratory, histopathology and imaging ties on urine stick testing (protein, blood and leuko-
techniques to complete the diagnostic process, but cytes). In men, this pain may be associated with 
the basic principles and requirements of clinical severe perineal or rectal discomfort, in which case 
assessment often lead towards an area of diagnosis prostatitis is suggested.
which directs subsequent laboratory and other techni- In young children with urinary tract infection and 
cally oriented investigations. Diseases of the kidney cystitis, the symptoms may be much less obvious, 
and urinary tract manifest a somewhat restricted but cystitis should be suspected in any child who 
array of symptoms and signs, but almost all patients cries on micturating. Pain from the kidneys, if it results 
can be categorized as having a well-defined renal or from acute infection or abscess, may occasionally 
urological syndrome, and keeping these in mind reflect tracking of pus upwards to the diaphragm, 
informs the clinical diagnostic process. There are causing diaphragmatic pain, or in the retroperitoneal 
many areas of overlap between clinical and pathologi- space to the psoas muscle, leading to pain when the 
cal processes within a single syndrome, and in general muscle is stretched on passive hip extension. Glom
it is not helpful to create artificial distinctions between erulonephritis is usually painless. Kidney tumours 
the two. Once the syndrome has been established, may cause a dull persistent flank pain.
further details of assessment and management objec-
tives become clearer. It is important to emphasize 
that a number of these syndromes were first described Haematuria
many years ago. They have stood the test of time 
principally because of their pragmatic value and Blood in the urine can be present with or without 
relative ease of recognition on the basis of clinical pain and may be continuous or intermittent. If visible 
assessment and quite simple tests. to the naked eye, it is termed macroscopic or visible 

haematuria; if detected only by stick tests or 
microscopy, it is called microscopic haematuria. 

Symptoms of renal and urological disease Haematuria as a result of parenchymal renal disease 
is usually:

Pain ■	 continuous
■	 painless

Pain arising from the urinary tract is a common ■	 microscopic (occasionally macroscopic).
symptom that is often due to obstruction, infection Haematuria arising from renal tumours is likely 
or tumour. Renal pain is usually felt in the flank or to be:
the loin. When renal pain arises from ureteric obstruc- ■	 intermittent
tion (e.g. a stone), discomfort may additionally radiate ■	 associated with renal pain
to the iliac fossa, the testicle or the labia, the pattern ■	 macroscopic.
depending to a certain extent on the level of the Bleeding from bladder tumours is often intermittent, 
obstruction. Patients with polycystic kidney disease with associated local symptoms suggesting cystitis.
may suffer chronic flank pain. Exacerbations occur It is important to decide early in the diagnostic 
with cyst infection and haemorrhage. process whether the haematuria originates from the 

Acute bladder outflow obstruction presents with kidneys or elsewhere in the urinary tract (Box 17.1). 
severe suprapubic pain. However, pain in the suprapu- This decision affects the order in which investigations 
bic region and perineum most commonly arises from should be conducted. For example, continuous painless 



356 17 Urogenital system ﻿

Box 17.1  Causes of haematuria Polyuria
Systemic Polyuria implies no more than a high urinary flow 
■	 Purpura rate. There will always be an associated increase 
■	 Sickle cell trait in the frequency of micturition (frequency) and 
■	 Bleeding disorders, including anticoagulant drugs often nocturia as well. Polyuria results from exces-
Renal sive water intake (e.g. psychogenic polydipsia or 

beer drinking), from an osmotic diuresis (glucose 
■	 Infarct/papillary necrosis as in diabetes mellitus, urea as in chronic renal 
■	 Trauma failure and sodium chloride as in diuretic use) and 
■	 Tuberculosis finally from abnormal renal tubular water handling, 
■	 Stones as seen in cranial diabetes insipidus (inadequate 
■	 Renal pelvis transitional cell carcinoma, and other renal secretion of antidiuretic hormone) or nephrogenic 

tumours: diabetes insipidus (renal resistance to antidiuretic 
–	 Wilms’ tumour (in children) hormone).

■	 Acute glomerulonephritis
Postrenal Frequency of micturition
■	 Ureteric stones
■	 Ureteric neoplasms Increased frequency of micturition results from 
■	 Bladder tumours (transitional cell carcinoma) polyuria, a reduction in functional bladder capacity 
■	 Bladder tuberculosis and bilharziasis or bladder/urethral irritation. The commonest cause 
■	 Radiation cystitis of polyuria is excessive fluid intake, whereas reduced 
■	 Drug-induced cystitis, e.g. cyclophosphamide functional bladder capacity is seen most frequently 
■	 Prostatic enlargement in patients with prostatic hypertrophy and bladder 
■	 Urethral neoplasms outlet obstruction. Lower urinary tract infection 
■	 Bacterial cystitis (cystitis) causes bladder irritation and an increase in 

urinary frequency. Some patients with neurological 
diseases, in particular multiple sclerosis, also have 
frequency of micturition. The detrusor muscle of 
the bladder contracts at an inappropriately low 

microscopic haematuria with associated proteinuria bladder volume, resulting in a low functional bladder 
in a young man or woman is most likely to be the capacity.
result of glomerulonephritis or other renal pathology. 
However, haematuria in an older person with risk Nocturia
factors for urothelial malignancy (smoking) is more 
likely to be caused by a bladder or ureteric tumour The term nocturia implies the need to empty the 
and merits a cystoscopy early in the investigative bladder during the hours of sleep. In health, there is 
process. It is important to remember that the com- a substantial diurnal variation in urinary flow rate: 
monest cause of dipstick haematuria in women is a night-time reduction in urine flow, together with 
contamination from menstrual blood. adequate functional bladder capacity, serves to obviate 

the need for night-time micturition. Thus polyuria 
Oliguria/anuria of any cause, or any cause of reduction of functional 

bladder capacity, may lead to nocturia. In addition, 
Oliguria is the passage of less than 500 ml of urine failure of the urine concentrating ability of the 
per day. Anuria is the complete absence of urine flow. kidneys, as occurs in renal impairment and sickle cell 
A reduction in urinary flow rate to the point of disease, will also lead to nocturia. Obviously, diuretics 
oliguria may be physiological, as in a patient whose taken in the evening and at night will lead to this 
fluid intake is low. Physiological reduction of urinary symptom.
flow rate implies that the glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) remains normal, and that the kidney is avidly 
retaining sodium and water. If inadequate fluid intake Dysuria
leads to a significant reduction in the extracellular Dysuria is a specific form of discomfort arising from 
fluid compartment, the resulting decrease in renal the urinary tract in which there is pain immediately 
blood flow leads to oliguria and reduction of the before, during or after micturition. The urine is often 
GFR. Oliguria arising in this fashion is termed prerenal described as ‘burning’ or ‘scalding’, and there is usually 
and is clearly pathological. Renal oliguria implies the associated frequency of micturition and decreased 
presence of intrinsic renal disease, whereas postrenal functional bladder capacity. Infection and neoplasia 
oliguria results from mechanical obstruction at any in the bladder or urethra are the most important 
level, from the collecting system in the kidney to the causes. An extreme form of dysuria, strangury, implies 
urethra. Anuria and oliguria may be signs of renal an unpleasant and painful desire to void when the 
failure. bladder is empty or nearly so.



SECTION Three
357

Urogenital system ﻿

Urgency of micturition, incontinence  General features
and enuresis Patients with chronic renal failure look unwell. The 
Urgency is the loss of the normal ability to postpone skin is pallid, the complexion sallow and a slightly yel-
micturition beyond the time when the desire to pass lowish hue is often evident. The mucous membranes 
urine is initially perceived. Incontinence is the are pale, reflecting the associated normochromic, 
involuntary passage of urine. In extreme cases, urgency normocytic anaemia. There may be bruises, purpura 
may lead to urge incontinence, in which the desire and scratch marks due to uraemic pruritus, and also 
to void cannot be voluntarily inhibited. Stress incon- an underlying disorder of platelet function and 
tinence, on the other hand, is leakage of urine associ- capillary fragility. The nails often appear pale and 
ated with straining or coughing, often due to weakened opaque (leuconychia) in the nephrotic syndrome 
pelvic floor muscles. The term enuresis is usually and sometimes in chronic renal failure. Intercurrent 
used to describe nocturnal enuresis, or bed wetting. episodes of severe illness in the past may have led 

to the appearance of Beau’s lines, which appear as 
Slow stream, hesitancy and  transverse ridges across the nails. Splinter haemor-

rhages in the nail beds point to underlying vasculitis, 
terminal dribbling which may be the cause of the renal failure or be 
The triad of slow stream, hesitancy and terminal indicative of endocarditis; there may be an associated 
dribbling is most frequently seen in elderly men with purpuric rash (Fig. 17.1). When blood urea is very 
prostatic hypertrophy. Here the bladder outlet is high, a uraemic frost may be seen on any part of the 
partially obstructed by the enlarging prostate gland, body and appears as a white powder; it is formed from 
with the result that the maximum achievable urinary crystalline urea deposited on the skin via the sweat. 
flow rate during micturition is reduced. There is often The onset of chronic renal failure in childhood is 
difficulty in initiating micturition (hesitancy) and in associated with impaired growth, causing short stature. 
completing micturition in a ‘clean stop’ fashion Severe bony deformity (Fig. 17.2) may be evident 
(terminal dribbling). The symptoms are nearly always in some cases, particularly in children, who may 
associated with frequency of micturition and nocturia, develop rickets. Advanced uraemia is also associated 
the result of a low functional bladder capacity. In with metabolic flap, a coarse tremor which is best 
more advanced cases, there may be progressive bladder seen at the wrists when in the dorsiflexed position. 
enlargement, with eventual overflow incontinence It is similar to the metabolic flap seen in patients 
and continuous or intermittent dribbling of urine. with advanced liver disease or respiratory failure. 

The presence of metabolic acidosis leads to increased 
Urethral discharge ventilation with an increased tidal volume, known as 

Kussmaul respiration.
Urethral discharge is usually noticed only by men 
and always requires further investigation. There may 
be associated symptoms of urethral irritation and 
the underlying pathology is likely to be urethritis, 
which is often infective and sexually transmitted 
(see later in this chapter).

Physical signs in renal and urological 
disease

These physical signs fall into three principal groups:
1	 Local signs related to the specific pathology, for 

example an enlarged palpable tender kidney in 
renal carcinoma, an obstructed kidney or a 
palpably enlarged bladder in a patient with 
acute or chronic retention.

2	 Symptoms of disturbance of renal salt and water 
handling, with resulting clinical evidence of 
extracellular fluid volume expansion or 
contraction.

3	 Signs of failure of the kidney’s normal excretory 
and metabolic functions.

In many renal patients, particularly those with 
advanced chronic renal failure and uraemia, signs 
from all three of the above categories may be present. Figure 17.1  Purpura in Henoch–Schönlein disease. 



358 17 Urogenital system ﻿
■	 Sinus tachycardia (exaggerated in the upright 

position)
■	 Low pulse pressure (exaggerated in the upright 

position)
■	 Flat neck veins even when almost supine

Poor skin turgor, ‘sunken eyes’ and dry mucous 
membranes are often cited as signs of volume deple-
tion, but these are generally unreliable features.

Abdominal palpation
The detection of the kidneys in the abdominal 
examination is described in Chapter 14. In slim people 
with relaxed abdominal muscles, it is sometimes 
possible to feel a normal right kidney (the right kidney 
is situated slightly lower than the left at the level of 
T12-L3). More often a palpable kidney can only be 
felt because it is enlarged, as in hydronephrosis, 
multiple cysts (polycystic kidney disease) or tumour 
(generally unilateral). A distended bladder is identified 
in the lower abdomen by a combination of palpation 

Figure 17.2  X-ray of the hands of a patient with chronic renal and percussion. Rectal examination is an important 
failure and secondary hyperparathyroidism, showing renal part of the clinical assessment of the renal patient: 
osteodystrophy. There is a loss of density of the tips of the digits bimanual palpation of the bladder is a more reliable 
(acro-osteolysis) with loss of density on either side of the way of assessing bladder enlargement than is simple 
interphalangeal joints and subperiosteal bone resorption. The per abdominal examination. In men, rectal examina-
latter is best seen in the middle phalanges of the index and tion also allows evaluation of the prostate gland, both 
middle fingers. for benign enlargement and for the detection of 

malignant change suggested by hard irregularity of 
the gland and absence of the central groove.

The circulation in the renal patient Auscultation
Of crucial importance here is the correct assessment Uraemic pericarditis and pleurisy may be suggested 
of the patient’s fluid volume status. It is important to by pericardial and pleural friction rubs, respectively. 
define whether the patient is euvolaemic, hypovolae- Their presence points to either advanced uraemia or 
mic or hypervolaemic. This is a bedside assessment a multisystem inflammatory disorder such as systemic 
that, with practice, can usually be made correctly. lupus erythematosus (SLE), which may have both 

Hypervolaemia is associated with some or all of renal and extrarenal manifestations. Added heart 
the following: sounds (S3 and S4) suggest, respectively, volume 
■	 Hypertension expansion and incipient heart failure, and ventricular 
■	 Elevation of the jugular venous pressure hypertrophy, often as a consequence of hypertension. 
■	 Peripheral oedema at the ankles or sacrum The presence of vascular bruits and/or impairment 
■	 Basal crackles on lung auscultation of the major arterial pulses is an important finding, 
■	 Ascites raising the possibility of renal vascular disease, which 
■	 Pleural effusion may underlie hypertension and/or renal failure if 

In patients with nephrotic syndrome (see below), bilateral.
oedema and salt and water retention are caused by 
reduced plasma oncotic pressure. Oedema with The eye in uraemia
expansion of the extracellular fluid is often accom-
panied by hypertension and, particularly if the cardiac Corneal calcification (limbic calcification) occurs in 
reserve is poor, may progress to pulmonary oedema patients with long-standing hyperparathyroidism with 
and other manifestations of heart failure. The presence elevation of blood calcium and phosphorus concentra-
of oedema itself, however, can coexist with intravas- tions (see Ch. 18). The presence of limbic calcification 
cular volume depletion, especially in patients with should not be confused with a corneal arcus (arcus 
nephrotic syndrome. senilis), which is a broader band at the edge of the 

The diagnosis of hypovolaemia requires the absence cornea and merges with the sclera. Corneal arcus is 
of any signs of hypervolaemia. The hypovolaemic usually most marked in the superior and inferior 
patient may have the following: positions, whereas limbic calcification is seen medially 
■	 Low blood pressure, often exaggerated in the and laterally or circumferentially. Retinal changes are 

upright position – postural hypotension extremely important in uraemic patients, many of 



SECTION Three
359

Urogenital system ﻿
whom have hypertension and/or diabetes. Renal Chronic renal failure
dysfunction in the absence of diabetic retinopathy 
cannot be attributed to diabetic nephropathy in Chronic renal failure implies that the GFR has been 
patients with type 1 diabetes. In type 2 diabetes, reduced for a considerable period and that the reduc-
however, diabetic nephropathy is present in many tion is largely or completely irreversible. It can result 
patients without any diabetic eye changes. Patients from almost any form of renal parenchymal disease, 
with renal disease as part of systemic vasculitis may chronic renal ischaemia or unrelieved urinary obstruc-
have manifestations of the latter in the retinae, with tion. If renal impairment is severe, there may be 
haemorrhages and exudates. Patients with chronic clinical manifestations of uraemia. These are usually 
renal failure are at greatly increased risk of a range evident when the GFR has fallen to one-third of 
of vascular complications affecting both the macro-
vasculature and the microvasculature. In the retinae, 
thrombosis of the central retinal artery or its branches, 
or of the central retinal vein and its branches, is an Box 17.2  Effects of renal failure on other organ systems
important manifestation of this. The presence of Disturbances of water and electrolyte balance
Kayser-Fleischer rings may help confirm a diagnosis ■	 Breathlessness due to salt and water overload
of Wilson’s disease. ■	 Deep sighing breathing (Kussmaul respiration) due to 

acidosis
■

The renal and urological syndromes 	 Weakness and postural fainting due to hypotension 
caused by salt and water depletion

■
Renal and urological syndromes are listed in Table 	 Lethargy and weakness from hypokalaemia
17.1. Some are exclusively renal, others exclusively Disturbances of the haematological system
urological, and some fall into both areas. The effects ■	 Lethargy and breathlessness associated with anaemia 
of renal failure on other organ systems are listed in owing to impaired production of erythropoietin by the 
Box 17.2. kidneys

■	 Defective coagulation and excessive bruising (advanced 
Acute renal failure renal failure)

■	 Haemorrhage from the gastrointestinal tract or lungs
Acute renal failure is the abrupt onset of declining 
renal function occurring over a period of hours or Disturbances of the cardiovascular system
days, usually (but not always) accompanied by a ■	 Cardiac failure or angina associated with fluid overload, 
marked reduction or cessation of the urinary flow hypertension, anaemia and impaired ventricular function 
rate. Central to the diagnosis, however, is a rapid (uraemic cardiomyopathy)
decline in the GFR, leading to nitrogen retention and ■	 Precordial chest pain due to pericarditis
usually to sodium and water retention as well. An ■	 Cardiac arrhythmias associated with left ventricular 
exception is the patient in whom the decline of GFR hypertrophy and hyperkalaemia/hypokalaemia
is not accompanied by reduction of urine flow, so- Disturbances of the respiratory system
called non-oliguric acute renal failure. The outlook 

■
depends on the cause. Many are reversible spontane- 	 Breathlessness and haemoptysis from fluid overload

■
ously (repair of ischaemic injury as in tubular necrosis) 	 Chest pain due to pleurisy
or as a result of therapy (removal of stone or other Disturbances of the musculoskeletal system
cause of obstruction). ■	 Muscular weakness and bone pain due to impairment of 

vitamin D activation and to excessive parathyroid gland 
activity

■	 Acute pain due to gout
Table 17.1  Renal and urological syndromes Disturbances of the nervous system

■
Renal and 	 Hypertensive stroke and encephalopathy

■
Renal urological Urological 	 Clouding of consciousness, fits and coma in advanced 

renal failure
Chronic renal Acute renal Urinary tract ■	 Impaired sensation or paraesthesia in the feet, due to 
failure failure infection peripheral neuropathy in long-standing uraemia
Acute nephritic Asymptomatic Urinary tract ■	 Impaired higher mental/intellectual function
syndrome urinary obstruction ■	 Entrapment neuropathies
Nephrotic abnormality Renal and urinary Disturbances of the eyes
syndrome Recurrent visible tract stone
Renal haematuria ■	 Pain from conjunctivitis caused by local deposits of 
hypertension calcium
Tubular ■	 Visual blurring from hypertensive retinal damage or 
syndromes retinal vascular disease



360 17 Urogenital system ﻿
normal or less. The implication of the term chronic Asymptomatic urinary abnormality
renal failure is that the timescale of onset and progres-
sion is rarely shorter than a few months and often Asymptomatic urinary abnormality is the presentation 
much longer. A further and crucial implication is an that arises in the patient who presents for a routine 
irreversible reduction in the number of functioning medical examination, often in the context of an 
nephrons with no prospect of significant recovery. employment or life insurance health check or at a 
These patients manifest a number of symptoms that screening visit to a primary care practitioner (PCP) 
are not attributable to specific pathophysiological or general practitioner (GP). Urine testing leads to 
changes. Lethargy, poor concentration, irritability and the unexpected finding of proteinuria, haematuria 
failure of higher mental functions and ability to or pyuria in an otherwise healthy patient. Further 
handle tasks are all commonly reported. In advanced assessment may reveal the coexistence of other renal 
cases, there may be confusion, fits and stupor. These syndromes, but nevertheless it is worth maintaining 
are preterminal, but reversible if steps are taken to the operational definition ‘asymptomatic urinary 
remove the excess uraemic toxins by dialysis. Nausea, abnormality’ because this is such a frequent presenta-
vomiting and diarrhoea are also common in advanced tion in clinical practice. It should not be forgotten 
uraemia and likewise improve following restoration that this syndrome may not only reflect disease of the 
of normal kidney function or treatment with dialysis kidneys, as it can also be a manifestation of malignancy 
or transplantation. anywhere in the urinary tract, infection or stone (if 

asymptomatic).

The acute nephritic syndrome Recurrent visible haematuria
As in acute renal failure, the acute nephritic syndrome Recurrent visible haematuria implies intermittent, 
implies a fairly brisk onset (days, weeks or months) or in some cases continuous, bleeding into the urinary 
of reduction in GFR and retention of nitrogenous tract to a degree sufficient to alter the macroscopic 
waste and usually salt and water also. Oliguria is, appearance of the urine. Depending on the circum-
therefore, common. The underlying pathology is an stances of the bleeding, the urine may be a rusty-
acute glomerulonephritis which, as well as causing brown colour, lightly tinged with red blood or more 
the functional abnormalities described above, also heavily bloodstained. The source of the bleeding may 
results in florid abnormalities of the urine. Haematuria be anywhere in the urinary tract, from the glomeruli 
(macroscopic or microscopic), proteinuria and tubular at the top to the urethra at the bottom. Important 
casts are often present. Many of the causes of acute causes are certain types of glomerulonephritis, renal 
nephritis are associated with functional abnormalities tumours and infections (particularly tuberculosis), 
of the immune system which may be detected by and tumours of the urinary tract transitional cell 
laboratory tests and which may also manifest with epithelium (urothelium) anywhere from the renal 
disease in other organs, for example the skin, joints pelves to the bladder and urethra.
or eyes, as in SLE, Henoch-Schönlein purpura (see 
Fig. 17.1) and systemic vasculitis. Urinary tract infection

The normal urinary tract is sterile except at its extreme 
The nephrotic syndrome distal end. Infection in the urinary tract leads to a 

range of symptoms and signs that reflect the location 
Nephrotic syndrome is defined somewhat imprecisely and severity of the infection. By far the most frequent 
as the presence of heavy proteinuria (usually >3 g/ site is the bladder, and the local symptoms reflect 
day, compared with normal of <150 mg/day), hypo bladder irritation, with frequency of micturition, low 
albuminaemia, hypercholesterolaemia and oedema. functional bladder capacity and dysuria. The presence 
It is not generally very helpful to attempt a more of urinary tract infection is defined importantly by 
precise definition because the clinical response to a the presence of a significant number of infecting 
given level of proteinuria shows considerable variability organisms in the urine. A working definition of a 
from patient to patient. It is, however, unusual for proven urine infection would be the detection of 
nephrotic syndrome to occur when the proteinuria more than 105 colony-forming units/ml urine in a 
is <2 g/day, and conversely some patients are able to carefully collected mid-stream specimen of urine 
maintain a normal or near-normal serum albumin (MSU). For less common infections, this definition 
concentration despite very heavy proteinuria in excess may not be appropriate. For example, in tuberculosis 
of 6 g/day. of the urinary tract, the number of organisms being 

Proteinuria of this magnitude implies glomerular excreted may be extremely low, and formal identifica-
pathology and may coexist with a significant reduction tion on the basis of urine culture is sometimes difficult 
in GFR. Thus, a number of the pathological entities or impossible.
capable of causing nephrotic syndrome may also Sterile pyuria can be caused by a treated infection, 
present as acute nephritic syndrome or the syndrome parasites such as schistosomiasis, TB, bladder stones, 
of chronic renal failure in other patients. inflammation or a tumour.



SECTION Three
361

Urogenital system ﻿

Urinary tract obstruction renal disease will be found to be the cause, and the 
likelihood of this is greatly increased in patients with 

Urinary tract obstruction syndrome may conveniently coexisting renal disease of any kind. Hypertension 
be divided into lower and upper tract obstruction. may be one of the presenting features of virtually any 
Lower urinary tract obstruction is defined by residual disease of the renal parenchyma, including all forms 
urine in the bladder after micturition or in more of glomerulonephritis, many forms of tubulointerstitial 
extreme forms by urinary retention with inability to disease, renal vascular disease, renal stone disease 
empty the bladder at all. The most common causes and obstruction. Renal tumours and renal infections 
relate to prostatic hypertrophy (benign hyperplasia may occasionally present with hypertension, which 
or carcinoma), and a characteristic array of symptoms in some cases can be the only presenting feature. 
and signs arises (frequency, nocturia, poor stream, Thus, in any patient with newly identified hyper-
hesitancy, terminal dribbling). All of these are a tension, the possibility of underlying renal disease 
consequence of low functional bladder capacity, an should be considered. Conversely, the exclusion of 
inability to empty the bladder completely and impair- renal disease as a cause of hypertension is generally 
ment of the urinary flow rate. straightforward, comprising the absence of symptoms 

The presence of upper urinary tract obstruction is and signs of renal disease, the absence of urinary 
established in most cases by the demonstration of a abnormalities on simple stick testing and the presence 
dilated renal collecting system (renal pelvis and/or of a normal GFR as judged by serum creatinine 
calyces), often seen to be proximal to a specific concentration or other surrogate measurement 
obstructing lesion. These features may be demon- for GFR.
strated by a number of imaging techniques, including 
ultrasound and intravenous urography (IVU) as well Renal tubular syndromes
as cross-sectional imaging techniques such as com-
puted tomography (CT) scanning. Upper and lower The majority of patients with parenchymal renal 
urinary tract obstruction may coexist, most frequently disease or obstructive renal damage manifest disor-
when the lower urinary tract obstruction is severe dered tubular function, although in only a few of 
and/or of long standing, and leading to progressive these are the tubular defects responsible for specific 
dilatation of the upper urinary tract with consequent clinical manifestations. Tubular syndromes arising in 
renal damage. It is important to remember that this context are generally unobtrusive and are certainly 
unilateral renal obstruction should not result in a rise common. Much less common is the patient in whom 
in the serum creatinine. Therefore, if the creatinine the tubular defect dominates the clinical picture. 
is elevated, there is also dysfunction of the contralateral These defects may be inherited or acquired, and are 
kidney. seen mainly in children. They usually require careful 

It is important to remember that an infected and laboratory testing to characterize them fully. Proximal 
obstructed urinary system is considered an emergency tubular abnormalities include renal phosphate wasting, 
and potentially life threatening. aminoaciduria (of these, cystinuria with cystine stone 

formation is the most important) and renal tubular 
Renal and urinary tract stones acidosis leading to chronic metabolic acidosis. Distal 

tubular defects are also associated with metabolic 
The operational definition of renal and urinary tract acidosis and with disturbances of potassium metabo-
stones is largely observational, depending on the lism, sodium-losing nephropathy and nephrogenic 
demonstration of one or more stones in any part of diabetes insipidus, with resulting failure, respectively, 
the urinary tract. Resulting symptoms and signs of salt and water conservation.
depend on the location of the stone(s) and on size. 
For example, small stones in the kidneys are frequently 
asymptomatic, or they may lead to subtle urinary Laboratory assessment and imaging of 
abnormalities, presenting initially with asymptomatic 
urinary abnormality. Larger stones in the kidneys the kidneys and urinary tract: assessment 
frequently lead to renal pain, whereas stones in the of structure and function
ureter are particularly likely to cause acute obstruction 
and very severe ureteric and renal pain. Bladder stones The urine
are usually associated with symptoms suggestive of 
cystitis with frequency, haematuria and pain all The urine should be tested as part of every general 
common, and often associated with urinary tract medical examination and not just in patients with 
infection. known renal or urinary tract disease. Not only may 

the testing lead to the discovery of hitherto unsus-
Renal hypertension pected diseases, such as diabetes or renal disease, but 

also documentation of normal urine often provides 
By far the most common cause of sustained blood a very useful historical reference point in the event 
pressure elevation is essential hypertension. However, of the later development of renal disease or urinary 
in a minority of patients with raised blood pressure, abnormalities. The urine specimen should be passed 



362 17 Urogenital system ﻿
into a clean container without additives. Testing 
should normally be conducted as soon as possible, 1.04
and if delayed more than 2 hours, the urine should 
be refrigerated (not frozen) and returned to room 
temperature before testing. For microbiological assess- 1.03
ment, it is essential to minimize the chances of 
contamination. This is best done by placing a sterile 
container in the path of the urine stream once voiding 1.02
has commenced (i.e. a mid-stream specimen).

Quantity 1.01

Normal adults in temperate climates usually pass 
between 750 and 2500 ml of urine every 24 hours. 
The minimum daily urine output compatible with 1.00
normal renal excretory function varies from person 0 1000 2000

to person and also with other factors such as diet. Osmolality (mOsmol/kg)

Abnormally low urine output (oliguria or anuria) Figure 17.3  Relationship between specific gravity and 
implies that the flow rate is below the minimum osmolality. 
required to allow excretion of the daily solute load 
(usually <500 ml/day in an adult). Polyuria is an 
imprecise term implying no more than the passage 
of a large volume of urine but implying nothing about 800 a
the reasons for this.

Colour 600 End-stage
renal

Urochrome and uroerythrin are pigments that con- failure
tribute to the natural yellow tinge of urine. Darkening 
occurs on staining as a result of oxidation of uro- 400
bilinogen to coloured urobilin. The colour of urine Normal
is also heavily influenced by the urinary flow rate, renal

with high flow leading to dilute urine and hence a 200 function

pale colour. Bile pigments in excess will colour the 
urine brown, with a characteristic yellow froth on b
shaking. Small to moderate quantities of blood impart 0
a smoky appearance, with larger amounts leading to 0 1000 500 300 200 150 120 100

progressive brown or, in the case of brisk bleeding, Serum creatinine (µmol/l)
bright red discoloration. Free haemoglobin from Figure 17.4  Relationship between renal concentration and 
intravascular haemolysis (e.g. in severe malaria – diluting capacity, and serum creatinine concentration. The serum 
blackwater fever) produces a darker red colour, verging creatinine is plotted on a logarithmic scale. This therefore 
on black in severe cases. Myoglobin may appear in represents linear changes in GFR, such as might occur in 
the urine after acute muscle necrosis (rhabdomyolysis), progressive renal failure. End-stage renal failure is shown on the 
causing a brown-red discoloration. Certain drugs left, and normal renal function on the right. Curve (a) represents 
discolour the urine (e.g. rifampicin (red), anthraqui- maximum concentrating capacity, e.g. in water deprivation, when 
none purgatives such as senna (orange), nitrofurantoin the normal kidney can maintain the serum creatinine in the 

normal range by increasing urine osmolality. In renal failure, the 
(brown) and methyldopa (grey)). Urine is normally urine cannot be concentrated and the serum creatinine rises. 
transparent when freshly passed and still warm but Curve (b) represents the maximum diluting capacity, e.g. after the 
may be cloudy if there are large numbers of red blood ingestion of large volumes of water. The normal kidney excretes 
cells or leukocytes or if phosphates have precipitated urine of low osmolality. In end-stage renal failure, urine osmolality 
in significant amounts. cannot be reduced and the water load is not adequately handled. 

There is also isosthenuria, i.e. the urine tends towards an 
Specific gravity and osmolality iso-osmolar state (specific gravity 1.010). 

Specific gravity and osmolality measurements yield 
similar information and, in the absence of significant advanced renal disease, the osmolality becomes rela-
glycosuria, are functions of the urinary concentrations tively fixed at about 300 mOsmol/kg water, close to 
of sodium, chloride and urea. The range of specific that of the glomerular filtrate (Fig. 17.4). This is 
gravity is 1.001-1.035, which is equivalent to termed isosthenuria, and because the urine concentra-
50-1350 mOsmol/kg water (Fig. 17.3). The presence tion cannot be varied, predisposes the patient to 
of renal insufficiency leads to a reduction in the range sodium and water overload if intake is high, and to 
of osmolality that the kidneys can generate and, in salt and water depletion if intake is low.

Urine osmolality (mOsmol/kg) Specific gravity (mOsmol/kg)



SECTION Three
363

Urogenital system ﻿

pH 20-200 mg/day is termed microalbuminuria. Although 
The pH varies from 4 to 8 and can be measured this range is frequently too low to be detectable by 
crudely using paper strips impregnated with an stick testing, it is an important finding, particularly 
indicator. If more accurate measurements are needed, in diabetics in whom it predicts the later onset of 
as in suspected renal tubular acidosis, a pH electrode overt diabetic nephropathy. The albumin:creatinine 
is used. Most people pass acid urine most of the time, (ACR) and protein:creatinine (PCR) ratios are useful 
exceptions being in some vegetarians, certain types surrogate markers for proteinuria and are increasingly 
of renal tubular acidosis, rapid water diuresis, meta- used instead of the 24-hour urine collection for 
bolic alkalosis and urine infection with urea-splitting quantification of protein excretion (Table 17.2).
organisms. The diagnostic implications of proteinuria depend 

greatly on its magnitude (Table 17.3). Heavy 
Glucose proteinuria (>1.5 g/day) is nearly always glomerular 
Glucose oxidase-impregnated dipsticks provide a quick in origin, and albumin predominates over larger 
and semiquantitative test for glucose in urine. By far proteins such as globulins. Other proteins, rarely 
the commonest causes of abnormal glycosuria are measured, arise from the renal tubules and include 
elevation of the plasma glucose to a point where the Tamm-Horsfall protein, retinol-binding protein and 
tubular reabsorptive capacity for glucose is exceeded nephrocalcin, the latter helping to prevent the forma-
(usually seen in people with diabetes) and during tion of urinary stones. It is worth noting that urine 
pregnancy, in which glycosuria occurs with normal light chains may not be detected by some routine 
plasma glucose concentrations. Very rarely, tubular laboratory urine protein assays and have to be sought 
transport defects may be associated with glycosuria separately.
at normal plasma glucose concentrations, and more Microscopy
frequently, but less predictably, patients with acquired 
chronic renal diseases may exhibit glycosuria at normal Microscopy (see Figs 17.5-17.8) is performed after 
plasma glucose concentrations. Collectively these slow spinning (at not more than 1000 g) of a fresh 
disorders are termed renal glycosuria. urine specimen for approximately 2 minutes. The 

pellet is resuspended in 0.5 ml of urine and examined 
Protein unstained on a microscope slide under a coverslip. 
The normal daily urine protein output is <150 mg. Important findings include leukocytes (suggestive of 
Dipsticks reactive to urine albumin provide a simple infection), red blood cells and various types of tubular 
semiquantitative test. They are sensitive to 200- casts. The presence of tubular casts is indicative of 
300 mg protein/l and have almost completely parenchymal renal disease. They may be red cell casts 
superseded the more cumbersome sulfosalicylic acid or white cell casts in which Tamm-Horsfall protein 
test. The urinary protein excretion rate generally rises 
in the upright posture and with activity and, in some 
normal individuals, this may lead to apparently 
abnormal proteinuria on spot urine specimens in Table 17.2  Relationship between ACR, PCR and 24-hour 
ambulant patients and even in 24-hour urine collec- urine protein excretion
tions (orthostatic proteinuria). Measurement of protein 24-hour 
in an early-morning urine specimen, however, reveals ACR PCR urine 
no protein, and this serves to distinguish abnormal (mg/ (mg/ protein 
proteinuria from orthostatic proteinuria. A further mmol) mmol) (g/day)
refinement is the specific measurement of urine 
albumin, which is increasingly used, which should Microalbuminuria 3-30
be <20 mg/day. Albumin excretion in the range Proteinuria >30 >50 >0.5

Table 17.3  Proteinuria
Mild (<500 mg/day) Moderate (up to 3 g/day) Heavy (>3 g/day)
Benign hypertensive nephrosclerosis Chronic pyelonephritis Acute glomerulonephritis
Obstructive nephropathy Acute tubular necrosis Chronic glomerulonephritis
Prerenal uraemia Acute glomerulonephritis Diabetic nephropathy
Renal tumour Chronic glomerulonephritis Pre-eclampsia
Fever Obstructive nephropathy Myeloma
Tubulointerstitial nephropathy Accelerated phase hypertension All causes of nephrotic syndrome
Chronic pyelonephritis Orthostatic proteinuria
Early diabetic nephropathy Urinary tract infection
Orthostatic proteinuria



364 17 Urogenital system ﻿

Figure 17.5  Erythrocytes in urinary sediment. 

Figure 17.8  Granular casts in urinary sediment. 

matrix has solidified and is studded with red or white 
blood cells. Granular casts probably represent degener-
ate cellular casts and have a grainy appearance. Hyaline 
casts contain no elements or debris and may be seen 
in small numbers in normal urine. It is usual to express 
the number of cells or casts seen per high-power 
field. The presence of red cell casts should alert one 
to the possibility of an aggressive glomerulonephritis. 
Red cell morphology may be a useful indicator as to 
the source of bleeding. Red cells with a normal outline 
usually, but not always, arise from the renal collecting 
system or from a point downstream of that, whereas 
red cells arising from the glomeruli are often distorted, 
probably as a result of movement through the glo-
meruli or osmotic insults during passage down the 

Figure 17.6  Leukocytes in urinary sediment. renal tubule.

Microbiological examination of the urine
Mid-stream urine specimens are normally satisfactory 
but are always contaminated to a certain extent 
during passage to the exterior. Extensive studies have 
shown that the finding of more than 105 bacteria per 
ml in a mid-stream specimen is usually associated 
with active urinary infection, especially when accom-
panied by leukocytes. Occasionally, to avoid contami-
nation, urine is taken directly from the bladder for 
diagnostic purposes via suprapubic aspiration.

Measurement of the glomerular filtration rate
Accurate assessment of the GFR requires measurement 
in blood alone or blood and urine of a compound 
that is filtered freely at the glomerulus and neither 
reabsorbed nor secreted by the tubules (Table 17.4). 
Inulin is the best agent but involves a continuous 
infusion of inulin and measurements of inulin con-
centration in plasma and urine. This is a laborious 

Figure 17.7  Hyaline casts, leukocytes and bacteria in urinary investigation that is generally confined to research 
sediment. (Reproduced with permission from Spencer ES, Petersen I and is not routinely available. A number of surrogates 
1971 Hand Atlas of Urinary Sediment. Munksgaard, Copenhagen.) for the inulin clearance method exist, however, and 



SECTION Three
365

Urogenital system ﻿

Table 17.4  Measurement of the glomerular filtration rate
1000

Method Comments
Plasma urea Poor surrogate: 800

–	 variable production rate
–	 variable excretion rate

600
Plasma creatinine Better than urea

Poor discrimination at 
near-normal GFR 400

Calculated GFR Useful surrogate of creatinine 
clearance 200

Creatinine clearance Reasonable surrogate but 
depends on accurate timed 
urine collection (usually 24 0

0 20 40 60 80 100 120
hours)

51 Creatinine clearance (ml/min)
Cr-EDTA The best surrogate in clinical 

practice Figure 17.9  Relationship between creatinine clearance and 
Expensive plasma creatinine concentrations. The normal range of serum 

creatinine concentration can be maintained only when the renal 
Insulin clearance Near-perfect measurement of creatinine clearance is greater than about 60 ml/min. The red area 

GFR but: represents the normal range of creatinine concentration. 
–	 needs continuous infusion
–	 difficult urine and plasma 

assays
–	 research studies only: not Table 17.5  Estimation of GFR formulae

suited to clinical practice Cockcroft and Gault Male GFR = [1.23 × weight 
(kg) × (140 − age)]/creatinine
Female GFR = [1.03 × weight 
(kg) × (140 − age)]/creatinine

details of these are given in Table 17.4. The most Modification of Diet in GFR = 186 × Pcr − 1.154 × 
frequently used surrogates, and also the crudest ones, Renal Disease age − 0.203 × 1.212 (if 
are the plasma urea and plasma creatinine concentra- black) × 0.742 (if female)
tions. Both compounds are produced endogenously 
(at an inconstant rate in the case of urea) and excreted Pcr, plasma creatinine in mg/dl.

by glomerular filtration. Neither is particularly accurate 
when used to establish the absolute level of glomerular 
filtration in an individual patient, although the plasma most commonly used is 51Cr-EDTA, which gives a 
creatinine concentration is certainly very useful when relatively easy and reproducible measure of GFR. It 
used to follow changes in an individual patient’s renal should be remembered that the GFR peaks at 20-25 
function, especially when the GFR is significantly years of age and at about 120 ml/min and declines 
reduced (Fig. 17.9). Creatinine clearance is more steadily thereafter at a rate of approximately 1 ml/
precise but requires a 24-hour urine collection with min/year. Appreciation of this age-related change in 
measurements of plasma creatinine concentration GFR is important in clinical practice, particularly 
and urine creatinine excretion rate. The clearance is when prescribing drugs to the elderly.
then calculated using the simple formula UV/P where 
U equals the urinary concentration of creatinine, V Measurement of renal tubular function
the urinary flow rate (usually expressed in ml/min) The two tests most frequently utilized are:
and P equals the plasma creatinine concentration. 1	 Tests of renal concentrating ability when 
This formula can be applied to urea or to any other investigating possible causes of polyuria.
compound subject to renal excretion. Only those 2	 Tests of renal acidification in patients with 
compounds that are freely filtered at the glomerulus metabolic acidosis and possible underlying renal 
and neither secreted nor reabsorbed by the renal tubular acidosis.
tubules are suitable for GFR measurement. Renal concentrating ability involves treating the 

The use of mathematical formulae to estimate GFR patient in a way that should lead to the production 
has been gaining in popularity, as most of these calcula- of a concentrated urine. Water deprivation is the most 
tions require simple information such as the age, sex, common provocation, and after 12 hours the urine 
weight and serum creatinine to derive an estimated osmolality should be at least 750 mmol/kg (specific 
GFR (Table 17.5). Precise measures of GFR used in gravity 1.020). Failure to concentrate the urine in 
clinical practice depend on measurement of the these circumstances indicates either impairment of 
excretion of certain administered compounds. The vasopressin output (pituitary diabetes insipidus) or 

Serum creatinine (µmol/l)



366 17 Urogenital system ﻿
resistance of the renal tubules to the action of vaso- ■	 A cooperative patient
pressin (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). These two ■	 Prior knowledge of the position and size of both 
possibilities may be distinguished by measuring the kidneys (usually provided by ultrasound)
urine osmolality after an injection of vasopressin (or ■	 A solitary functioning kidney should only be 
an analogue) when the urine osmolality should biopsied if the diagnostic yield is deemed to be 
increase to at least 750 mmol/kg. crucial or to exclude malignancy

Renal tubular acidification can be assumed to be ■	 Absence of a bleeding disorder
adequate if the pH of a random specimen of urine ■	 Availability of blood for transfusion in the event 
is below 5.5. Urine pH >5.5 in the presence of of haemorrhage
metabolic acidosis usually indicates renal tubular ■	 An appropriate indication
acidosis. If the patient is only minimally acidotic and Kidney biopsy is often the only way to distinguish 
the urine pH is >5.5, a provocative test, in which the various forms of glomerulonephritis, both from 
ammonium chloride is given at a dose of 0.1 g/kg one another and from tubulointerstitial diseases of 
body weight to provide an acid load and an acute the kidney.
mild metabolic acidosis, can be performed. The pH 
should fall to <5.4 if acidification is normal.

Imaging of the urinary tract
Assessment of the urine in the  
stone-forming patient Plain radiographs
Assessment of urine in a stone-forming patient In many people, one or both of the kidneys can be 
involves measurement of the important constituents seen outlined by perirenal fat on plain abdominal 
of stone whose outputs may be abnormally increased films or nephrotomograms. The information gleaned 
and also measurement of at least one of the natural is limited, although certain types of renal stone or 
inhibitors of stone formation. Ideally this should be other calcifications may be identified.
combined with analysis of the stone itself. The tests 
that should be undertaken in all stone patients are:
■	 Plasma calcium, phosphate, alkaline Ultrasound

phosphatase, urea, urate, creatinine and Ultrasound provides good images of the renal paren-
electrolytes. chyma and collecting system, and in nearly all patients 

■	 24-hour urine collection for simultaneous gives a reliable estimate of renal size as well as 
measurement of: identifies discrete lesions within the parenchyma, 
○	 calcium hydronephrosis and stone. Doppler studies often 
○	 uric acid permit assessment of blood flow in the main renal 
○	 oxalate arteries and in the larger intrarenal branches. The 
○	 citrate resistive index, measured by Doppler ultrasound, 
○	 creatinine indicates the degree of chronic intrarenal ischaemic 
○	 sodium. injury. Although the upper ureter can be seen quite 

■	 Nitroprusside test for cystine. well in most patients, the lower ureter is not adequately 
The identification of increased excretion rates of visualized. Ultrasound examination of the bladder is 

calcium, uric acid, oxalate or cystine indicates a strong also extremely useful, allowing calculation of the 
predisposition to recurrent stone formation. Con- bladder capacity when full and also after micturition 
versely, citrate is a natural inhibitor of stone formation, (emptying should be virtually complete), as well as 
and a low urine citrate is associated with increased visualization of the bladder wall and lesions projecting 
stone risk. All patients who make radiopaque stones into the bladder itself (e.g. tumours). It can be 
should be screened for cystinuria using the nitroprus- combined with a measurement of urinary flow rate 
side test. If hypercalciuria or hypercalcaemia are along with post micturition residual to assess the 
noted, then the parathyroid and serum angiotensin- efficiency of micturition and bladder emptying in 
converting enzyme should also be measured. patients with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) 
Kidney biopsy or incontinence.

Kidney biopsy, in which one or two small cores Intravenous urography
of renal cortex are removed using a needle-biopsy 
technique, is performed in patients in whom diffuse Intravenous urography (IVU) involves the intravenous 
renal parenchymal disease is suspected. However, not injection of organic iodine compounds that are 
everyone with renal parenchymal disease requires excreted and concentrated radiographically. It is an 
a biopsy. The procedure is invasive and carries a extremely good technique for examining the renal 
small but definite risk of serious complications. It collecting system, the ureters and the bladder, but 
is therefore important to define the indications and gives less information than ultrasound about the renal 
contraindications carefully. The risk of the procedure parenchyma (Fig. 17.10). Imaging by IVU depends on 
can be minimized by the following preconditions: renal function. This is useful in that it gives a crude 



SECTION Three
367

Urogenital system ﻿

Figure 17.10  Normal excretion urogram. In this film, taken 15 Figure 17.11  Excretion urogram. In this film, made 30 minutes 
minutes after intravenous injection of the iodine-based contrast after injection of contrast, the left kidney fails to excrete a 
medium, the calyces of both kidneys, the ureters and the bladder detectable concentration of contrast (non-functioning left kidney) 
can be seen. and the right kidney shows dilated, hydronephrotic calyces.  

The right ureter is partially obstructed at the level of the body of 
the fifth lumbar vertebra. The circular lucency in the bladder is the 
dilated balloon of a Foley catheter. 

measure of the symmetry, or otherwise, of excretory 
capacity, but it also means that the image quality is 
poor in patients with renal insufficiency in whom 
the GFR is low (Fig. 17.11).

Radionuclide studies
Antegrade and retrograde urography Diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid (99Tc-DTPA) 
In antegrade and retrograde urography X-ray contrast is used to investigate the excretory function of each 
material is instilled directly into the urinary tract via kidney selectively (Fig. 17.12). The test is very useful 
a percutaneous needle (antegrade) or a ureteric for the assessment of symmetry of function, delayed 
catheter inserted via a cystoscope (retrograde). These onset of excretion (as may happen in renal artery 
tests are invasive and are most often used in the stenosis) and retention of excreted isotope (as seen 
evaluation of patients with clear obstruction of the in the presence of obstruction). 99Tc-DMSA (dimer-
urinary tract. captosuccinic acid) is a similar technique used to 

show the gross renal morphology. MAG3 (mercap-
Cystography toacetyltriglycine) renogram can assess comparative 

function and demonstrate upper urinary tract 
In cystography, the bladder is filled with contrast obstruction.
medium via a urethral catheter and X-rays are taken 
before, during and after micturition. The test indicates Computed tomography and magnetic 
the completeness of bladder emptying, and also 
whether or not urine refluxes up the ureters during resonance imaging
micturition. This also is an invasive test, the principal Computed tomography scanning of the kidneys 
risk being the introduction of infection. Urodynamics sometimes complements the information gained from 
(the measurement of pressure and urine flow) may ultrasound and certainly yields important information 
be included in more detailed studies of bladder about the surrounding structures in the retroperito-
function. neum (Fig. 17.13). It is particularly useful in patients 



368 17 Urogenital system ﻿

Left kidney

Right kidney

Background

A

0 15 30
Minutes

Figure 17.12  Radioisotope excretion (ordinate) during the 30 
minutes after intravenous injection in a patient with right renal Liver Intestine
artery stenosis and hypertension. The left kidney achieves more 
rapid excretion of isotope. The malfunctioning right kidney was the Kidney Aorta
cause of the patient’s hypertension. Hilum Spleen

Pelvis of
kidney
Kidney

B

with ureteric obstruction from, for example, retrop- Figure 17.13  (A) CT scan with (B) drawing showing normal 
eritoneal malignancy or retroperitoneal fibrosis. Spiral kidneys. 
CT is becoming the investigation of choice for renal 
calculi as well. Triple-phase CT is used to discriminate 
malignant renal tumours from benign ones. In some 
cases, more information is obtained using magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). Caution has to be exercised, 
however, if gadolinium is required, as its use has been Sexually transmitted infections
associated with nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in 
patients with renal disease. Current data suggest an Introduction
increased risk of this condition in patients with a 
GFR below 30 ml/min. In this section we will cover the main principles of 

sexually transmitted infection (STI) management 
Arteriography and venography including history, examination and infection manage-

ment as well as important and common non-infective 
Arteriography and venography are both invasive and conditions that can affect the genitals and mimic STI.
are used in selected patients in whom detailed evalu- There are two main principles in the management 
ation of the renal blood supply (arterial or venous) of STI. First, an infected patient implies that at least 
is required. The commonest indication is the patient one other person is also infected. Anyone who has 
with hypertension and/or renal insufficiency in whom had sexual contact with the index patient could be 
renal artery stenosis is suspected. In the context of infected; this includes monogamous partners, babies 
renal insufficiency, contrast-induced deterioration of and victims of sexual assault and abuse. Thus, treating 
function is often see, but can usually be minimized a patient in isolation will not control the spread of 
by adequate prehydration and the use of non-ionic these infections. Second, a patient may harbour more 
contrast agents. MRI can be used to generate images than one sexually transmitted infection (Box 17.3). 
of the major renal vasculature. Although the images Many infections are asymptomatic, acquired months 
are generally not as good as those from conventional or even years previously. Stigma and shame are often 
arteriography, the technique has the advantage of associated with STI and patients are often uncomfort-
avoiding contrast nephropathy and of being non- able or embarrassed to give their sexual history or a 
invasive. CT imaging may also be used in this way history of genitourinary symptoms. Therefore, 
but still requires some contrast. maintaining confidentiality is key.



SECTION Three
369

Urogenital system ﻿

Box 17.3  Sexually transmitted/microbial agents in the genital tract (diseases)
Bacteria
■	 Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
■	 Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea)
■	 Chlamydia trachomatis of D-K serovars (non-gonococcal urethritis)
■	 Chlamydia trachomatis of LGV 1-3 serovars (lymphogranuloma venereum)
■	 Haemophilus ducreyi (chancroid)
■	 Mycoplasma genitalium (non-gonococcal urethritis)
■	 Klebsiella granulomatis (donovanosis/granuloma inguinale)
■	 Gardnerella vaginalis, anaerobes, e.g. Mobiluncus, Bacteroides, Atopobium vaginae, bacterial vaginosis-associated bacteria 

1-3, Leptotrichia, Sneathia species (bacterial vaginosis)
■	 Shigella species (shigellosis)
■	 Salmonella species (salmonellosis)
Viruses
■	 Herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (genital herpes)
■	 Human papilloma virus (genital warts)
■	 Molluscum contagiosum virus (molluscum contagiosum)
■	 Human immunodeficiency virus (AIDS and related diseases)
■	 Hepatitis A, B, C and delta viruses
■	 Cytomegalovirus
Fungal
■	 Candida albicans (thrush/moniliasis/candidiasis/candidosis)
Ectoparasites
■	 Phthirus pubis (pediculosis pubis)
■	 Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies)
Protozoa
■	 Trichomonas vaginalis (trichomoniasis)
■	 Entamoeba histolytica (amoebiasis)
■	 Giardia lamblia (giardiasis)
Nematodes
■	 Enterobius vermicularis (enterobiasis)

History taking and examination must be carried Box 17.4  History in sexually transmitted infection
out in private, confidentially and using non-judgemental 
attitude and language. ■	 Urethral discharge

Diagnosis is achieved by taking a good history (Box ■	 Dysuria
17.4) and examination and performing the relevant ■	 Urinary frequency
laboratory tests. Effective treatment and partner ■	 Vaginal discharge
notification/contact tracing should be instituted ■	 Dyspareunia
promptly. In children under 16 years of age, ensure ■	 Genital ulcer
they are able to understand the clinical process (follow ■	 Painful scrotal swelling
the Fraser’s guidelines in the UK) and that any child ■	 Pubic genital itch
safeguarding issues are managed appropriately (via ■	 Genital rash
children safeguarding team). ■	 Anorectal symptoms

History
of presenting complaint and sexual activity are taken. 

Taking a sexual history has many similarities with A non-judgemental tone and attitude are essential 
that of any other medical history in that the clinician to allow the patient to give an accurate history. Starting 
needs to ask about systemic symptoms, past medical with neutral questions such as presenting complaint 
history, medication and allergies, etc. There are also and past medical history allows the clinician to 
some very basic differences, including that the present- establish a rapport with the patient
ing history is commonly genital symptoms and the Sexual history includes taking details of when the 
questions are about a very private part of peoples’ sexual activity took place, the gender of the partner(s) 
lives. Therefore, its important that thorough histories and sexual activity itself (e.g. vaginal, oral, anal sex; 



370 17 Urogenital system ﻿
mutual masturbation; use of sex toys, etc), whether morning urethral discharge. Ensure that the discharge 
the patient was the active or receptive partner for these is from the urethra and not from under the foreskin 
activities or both and whether any barrier protection and that the urinary frequency is not secondary to 
(condom) was used. These questions need to be asked urinary tract infection or physiological conditions 
for each of their sexual partners. The time frame the such as irritable bladder syndrome or anxiety.
sexual history usually covers is the last 3 months unless Common STI can be complicated by epididymo-
the infection has a much longer incubation period/ orchitis presenting with scrotal swelling and pain. It 
asymptomatic phase, e.g. late latent syphilis or HIV. is important to exclude testicular torsion and hernia 

The type of sexual practice will dictate the sites strangulation which are surgical emergencies.
from which to take tests. Familiarity with the col- Acute epididymo-orchitis in those under 35 years 
loquial words for common sexual practices is useful old is likely due to gonococcal or chlamydial infection 
to allow the patient to use his own words when and in those over 40 to a bacterial urinary tract 
giving the sexual history. ‘Straight sex’ indicates infection such as caused by Escherichia coli. Testicular 
heterosexual (penovaginal) intercourse, oroanal pain is not a common presentation of testicular cancer.
intercourse (‘rimming’) more commonly in men who Erectile dysfunction and loss of libido are common 
have sex with men, insertive or receptive brachioanal presentations that can be a significant cause of anxiety 
intercourse (‘fisting’) and, rarely, urinating onto each for the patient. These are not normally secondary to 
other (‘watersports’) or using faeces during intercourse an STI and tend to be due to other factors including 
(‘scat’). ‘Bare backing’ is unprotected anal intercourse; psychological, e.g. anxiety and stress or general medical 
‘cottaging’ is sexual intercourse in public places. conditions, e.g. diabetes.

Sex ‘toys’ or ‘dildos’ (artificial penises) are objects 
inserted into the rectum or vagina. ‘Fisting’ and ‘toys’ Female
may cause injury presenting as an acute abdomen. 
‘Bondage’, in which the person is tied up during sex, The most common symptoms women complain of 
may be associated with masochism (sexual gratification are vaginal discharge or a change in the vagina dis-
through the infliction of pain on another). This should charge and dyspareunia. The history should include 
be considered if superficial injuries are present without duration and timing of symptoms as well as a 
an obvious cause. menstrual and basic obstetric history, including 

The partners’ sexual health risks should be assessed contraception, to ascertain risk of pregnancy.
as much as possible; asking if the partner has any Many women have a physiological discharge that 
genitourinary symptoms or STI, is from a high-risk is not offensive or itchy and is normal for them. This 
country for HIV infection or is an injecting drug user, physiological discharge may increase in pregnancy or 
etc will help assess the risks of the patient of any STI. during sexual arousal.

Sexually transmitted infections can have extra- The presence of an offensive odour may indicate 
genital manifestations, making a systematic review bacterial vaginosis or Trichomonas vaginalis or a 
relevant in some cases. Examples include unilateral retained foreign body, e.g. tampons.
kerato-conjunctivitis with gonococcal, chlamydial The commonest cause of an itchy discharge is 
and herpes infections and bilateral kerato-conjunctivitis candidal infection (thrush) or a physiological discharge 
in Reiter’s disease, joint involvement in gonorrhoea, in the presence of an itchy dermatitis, e.g. eczema 
syphilis and Reiter’s disease, lower abdominal pain or lichen sclerosus.
with PID and right upper quadrant pain with Common STI causes of vaginal discharge include 
Fitzhugh-Curtis syndrome. gonococcal, chlamydial or herpetic infections of the 

With increasing awareness of STI and HIV, a sig- cervix (Fig. 17.14).
nificant number of patients attend for asymptomatic Dyspareunia is pain during sexual intercourse. 
sexual health screens. This presents a good opportunity Pain can be deep or superficial. Deep dyspareunia is 
to educate the patient around safe sex, STI prevention usually caused by pelvic pathology including pelvic 
and effective contraception to prevent unplanned inflammatory disease (PID), endometritis and ovarian 
pregnancies. pathology. PID is treated with antibiotics and the other 

conditions are managed by the gynaecology team.
Superficial dyspareunia caused by vulvitis must be 

Presenting symptoms differentiated from vulvodynia, which is localized 
vulval tenderness or pain not always associated with 

Male sexual intercourse and can be multifactorial in origin. 
The most common symptoms men complain of are Women with vulvodynia may need management from 
urethral discharge, dysuria, frequency and testicular the multidisciplinary team including specialist psychol-
pain. The important aspects would be the duration ogy and physiotherapy input.
and timing of the symptoms. It is important to exclude 
other conditions that can have the same symptoms Both male and female patients
but are not STI; e.g. skin inflammation causing dysuria There are some presentations that are common to 
or physiological prostatic secretions seen as early both sexes including anogenital ulceration (also known 



SECTION Three
371

Urogenital system ﻿

Figure 17.14  Mucopurulent cervicitis caused by Chlamydia Figure 17.16  Genital wart on the frenum of the penis. 
trachomatis. 

‘Crabs’ and nits on the hair shaft may be seen in 
patients with pediculosis pubis, allowing the appropri-
ate treatment to be given quickly.

Itching secondary to scabies tends to be more 
generalized except for the face. Intradigital burrows 
and genital nodules may be seen in these cases, aiding 
the diagnosis.

If a genital rash is present, then dermatological 
conditions need to be considered. The most common 
conditions are eczema, psoriasis, lichen sclerosus, 
lichen simplex or a contact dermatitis

Lumps are a common presentation of genital warts 
(Fig. 17.16) or molluscum contagiosum but also of 
normal skin variants including penile pearly papules 

Figure 17.15  Acute ulcers of primary genital herpes. Both herpes and epidermal cysts.
simplex virus types I and II can cause genital herpes. Anorectal symptoms include pain, soreness, itching, 

rectal discharge, change in bowel habit and other 
symptoms of proctitis. This may be the early pres-

as sores), pubic or genital itch, lumps and anorectal entation of a gastrointestinal or systemic condition 
symptoms. such as Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis. It may 

In general, anogenital ulceration is due to herpes also be an infective proctitis resulting from herpes 
(Fig. 17.15) or syphilis unless proven otherwise. simplex, gonococcal, chlamydia D-K serovar or lym-

Painful anogenital ulcerations, especially if recurrent, phogranuloma venereum infection. A careful history 
are most commonly due to herpes simplex infections. including details of sexual activity (especial unpro-
Other causes include trauma, chancroid and Behcet’s tected anal sex) and other systematic symptoms is 
disease. important.

Painless ulcers are most commonly due to syphilis Anal itch (pruritus ani) may be secondary to rectal 
infection, though occasionally syphilitic chancres can discharge, anal warts, perianal dermatitis or poor anal 
be painful when a secondary bacterial infection is hygiene. If the itch is worse at night, then threadworm 
present. infestation should be considered.

If the infection is acquired in a tropical country, 
then chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum and Special groups
donovanosis should also be considered. Men who have sex with men (MSM)

In recent years lymphogranuloma venereum has MSM are at higher risk of a number of STI including 
become endemic in MSM but is more likely to present rectal infections (associated with receptive anal 
as a proctitis rather than an ulcer. intercourse), HIV and viral hepatitides especially 

Pubic and genital itch is usually due to pediculosis hepatitis B and C. These risks are increased when 
pubis, scabies or other inflammatory genital conditions, recreational drugs are used (via the nasal, oral, rectal 
such as allergic dermatitis, but may be psychological and intravenous routes) to enhance the sexual experi-
or be due to lichen simplex. ence (chemsex).With this in mind, the history taken 

Similar symptoms in sexual or household contacts should include history of chemsex, route the drugs 
indicate that an STI is more likely. were administered as well as previous testing for 



372 17 Urogenital system ﻿
these viral infections and previous vaccination for 
hepatitis A and B.

Additional investigations may be needed from 
MSM including Gram-stained smears from the 
rectum and cultures from the rectum and throat 
to exclude gonorrhoea. In cases of proctitis, cul-
tures or NAAT for herpes simplex and Chlamydia 
trachomatis of both D-K and LGV serovars may be 
indicated.

MSM with diarrhoea should have their stools 
examined for giardia, amoebas, shigella and salmonella 
and, if HIV infection is suspected, other causes of 
HIV-related diarrhoea should be looked for.

Screening for blood-borne viruses (HIV, Hep B, Figure 17.17  Palpation of the testis. Gloves should be worn. 
Hep C) and syphilis is important, with prompt treat-
ment or vaccination as appropriate.

Very recently, there has been convincing evidence should be offered, especially when female patients 
concerning the efficacy of post-exposure prophylaxis are being examined by male clinicians.
(PEP) and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV The examination should be systematic covering 
in this high-risk group. At the time of this writing, the whole of the genital area. The clinician should 
post-exposure prophylaxis is funded in the UK whilst note any skin changes, colour, epidermal markings, 
pre-exposure prophylaxis is not, although funding fissures, ulcers, masses, tender areas, the presence of 
has been approved in other countries in the developed any discharge and its characteristics, e.g. frothy, 
world. The presence of these strategies could have purulent, clear etc. and any piercings or any other 
very significant impact on the course of the HIV abnormalities seen.
epidemic in the next few years.

Male examination
Sex workers
Sex workers are a vulnerable group of people who All the areas need to be examined, the skin (including 
are at higher risk of STI. Taking a thorough history perineum and perianal areas), pubis and inguinal 
is important and the sites screened would be depend- areas (for lymphadenopathy), scrotum (including 
ent on the history elicited. Hepatitis screening and testis (Fig. 17.17), epididymis), penis (shaft, prepuce, 
vaccination is indicated. Support to enable them to glans and meatus). Anal, prostate and natal cleft 
better negotiate safe sex and increasing awareness examination including proctoscopy may be indicated 
around safe sex practices and drug and alcohol by the history elicited.
dependence should be provided.

Female examination
Young people
STI are more common in young people, as are All the areas need to be examined, including the skin 
unplanned pregnancies. Tests indicated are dependent (including the perineum and perianal areas), pubis, 
on the history elicited. Support and information inguinal areas (for lymphadenopathy), labia majora, 
around safe sex practices, drug and alcohol dependence labia minora and vulva. Then speculum examination 
and contraception should be provided. should be done to examine the vagina and cervix. 

Its important to ensure that the young person Further bimanual examination of the pelvis, anal and 
understands what is being said and done in the natal cleft examination including proctoscopy may 
clinical setting (i.e. Fraser competent) and is safe be indicated by the history elicited.
and not at any risk of coercion either at home or in 
the school environment. It is essential that children Tests and further management
(under 18 years) are screened using an appropri- With improving technology there has been a para-
ate child safeguarding questionnaire. Any concerns digm shift in STI testing. Nucleic acid amplification 
raised should be discussed with the appropriate tests (NAAT) and point-of-care tests (POCT) with 
safeguarding team. improved sensitivities and specificities have meant 

better and quicker diagnosis and therefore improved 
management of STI and partner notification, even in 

Genital examination the most resource-poor areas of the world.
Currently we use a combination of microscopy, 

It is essential when performing genital examination NAAT and antibody testing to perform a full 
that the patient understands and consents to the sexual health screen. Point-of-care testing is also 
examination and that it takes place in a private well-lit used, mainly for HIV. The two-glass test is now 
room. Gloves should always be worn. Chaperones obsolete.



SECTION Three
373

Urogenital system ﻿

Figure 17.18  Treponema pallidum seen under the dark-field 
microscope. The spiral-like treponemes can be seen, together with Figure 17.19  Gram-stained smear showing Gram-negative 
red blood cells. intracellular diplococci typical of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. 

Box 17.5  Procedure for Gram staining
Box 17.6  Causes of non-gonococcal urethritis

■	 Fix the smear on the slide by passing it through a flame Sexually transmitted diseases
twice

■	 Stain with 2% crystal violet for 30 seconds, then wash ■	 Chlamydia trachomatis D-K serovars (approximately 30%)
with tap water ■	 Mycoplasma genitalium (approximately 30%)

■	 Stain with Gram’s iodine for a further 30 seconds and ■	 Unknown (up to 50%)
wash with water ■	 Trichomonas vaginalis

■	 Decolorize with acetone for a few seconds ■	 Ureaplasma urealyticum
■	 Wash with water and counterstain with 1% safranin for ■	 Herpes simplex virus

10 seconds ■	 Intrameatal warts
■	 After a final wash with water, dry by pressing between ■	 Meatal chancre

filter paper Non-sexually transmitted diseases
■	 Bacterial urinary tract infection
■	 Tuberculosis
■

Near patient diagnosis, in the form of microscopy, 	 Urethral stricture
■

is still important in patients with a discharge or a 	 Stevens-Johnson syndrome
■

painless ulcer. To perform microscopy a sample of 	 Benign mucous membrane pemphigoid
■

the discharge needs to be obtained using a loop or 	 Chemical
■

swab and smeared onto the slide, either dry or wet. 	 Trauma
■

The dry slide is Gram-stained for examination; the 	 Others
wet slide is not stained prior to examination.

Dark ground microscopy is used to diagnose primary 
syphilis chancre (Fig. 17.18).

negative test for gonococci indicates non-gonococcal 
Gram staining urethritis (Box 17.6). The most common cause of 
The Gram-staining procedure is outlined in Box 17.5. non-gonococcal urethritis is Chlamydia trachomatis.

A wet preparation, made by mixing urethral material 
Urethral sample using a loop with a drop of normal saline on a slide, 
If the patient has passed urine just before the test, can be examined by bright- or dark-field illumination 
the urethral smear may show no polymorphonuclear for trichomonas, which appear as ovoid protozoa 
leukocytes because the urine will have washed out with beating flagellae and in jerky motion.
the accumulated urethral material. In such cases, 
the patient should be asked to re-attend for another Vaginal sample
urethral swab after having held urine for at least A vaginal sample is taken to look for the spores 
2 hours. Gram-negative intracellular diplococci, and pseudomycelia of thrush and for the absence 
which appear as opposing bean-shaped cocci within of lactobacilli and the presence of mixed flora and 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes under the microscope ‘clue cells’ (Ison-Hay criteria), which are indicative of 
(Fig. 17.19), suggest gonococcal urethritis. The pres- bacterial vaginosis. ‘Clue cells’ are vaginal epithelial 
ence of five or more polymorphonuclear leukocytes cells covered with Gardnerella vaginalis, which are 
per high-power field (×1000 magnification) with a Gram-variable but mainly Gram-negative coccobacilli.



374 17 Urogenital system ﻿
pH dilution or four-fold decrease in antibody titre within 
A vaginal pH >4.5 using a litmus paper or strip is 6-12 months. After successful treatment of all stages 
present in bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis. of syphilis, the specific tests usually remain positive 

whereas the VDRL or RPR test may slowly revert 
Nucleic acid amplification testing to negative, but commonly remains positive in lower 
There are many different platforms for testing for titre in late syphilis. A greater than two-fold dilution 
infections using nucleic acid testing. There is a range or four-fold increase in antibody titre following treat-
of turnaround times and specimen delivery systems ment indicates recrudescence or reinfection.
that allow samples to be taken from different sites All patients should be screened for syphilis with 
(pharynx, urine, vagina, cervix and anal canal) and serological tests using the treponemal EIA, TPPA or 
tested even if there is a long transport time. These TPHA or combination of the VDRL/RPR and TPHA/
advances have meant that testing hard-to-reach groups TPPA. A positive EIA is confirmed with TPPA or TPHA 
is more practical and the results more reliable. (and vice versa) and a VDRL/RPR performed to assess 

NAAT is the mainstay of screening for Neisseria activity. If syphilis is endemic, these tests should be 
gonorrhoea, Chlamydia trachomatis and herpes simplex repeated after 3 months if initial tests are negative. If 
infections. Anyone found to be gonorrhoea positive primary syphilis is suspected, the EIA-IgM or FTA-abs 
on screen then needs samples sent for culture to IgM test is also performed, as this can be the first 
ascertain antibiotic sensitivities. Recent studies have serological test to be positive, although any one or 
shown that self-taken vaginal samples are more sensi- combination of treponemal tests may be positive. 
tive and specific than cervical nucleic acid testing in In babies with suspected congenital syphilis, the 
women. EIA-IgM or FTA-abs tests using an IgM conjugate 

Worldwide nucleic acid testing is also used for should be requested because of passive transfer of 
screening for Trichomonas vaginalis and Treponema maternal IgG antibodies across the placenta. Positive 
pallidum infections. serological results must be confirmed by a second set 

of tests, but treatment should be started immediately 
Culture in early infectious syphilis or in pregnant women 
Culture is still used for STI testing, mainly in cases while awaiting confirmation.
when the patient has a positive nucleic acid amplifica- Endemic treponematoses, such as yaws, bejel 
tion test for gonorrhoea. The other time would be and pinta, may result in positive serological tests 
for speciation and sensitivity testing in patients with for syphilis. It is not possible to differentiate the 
recurrent candidal infections. treponematoses by serological tests. Patients may 

recall having such infection, or there may be a history 
Antibody testing of being brought up in the countryside in endemic 

areas, with evidence of signs of such infection such 
Antibody testing is the main screening method for as ‘tissue-paper’ scarring of the shins in yaws, which 
the blood-borne viruses and Treponema palladium may suggest non-venereal treponematoses. However, 
infections. These can be either by formal blood test there may be coinfection with syphilis, and it would 
or point-of-care testing. The advantages of point-of- be prudent to treat all positive treponemal serology 
care testing are being less invasive (finger prick or as for syphilis.
saliva testing), quick results (5-20 min). Any positive 
results need to be confirmed by formal blood test. Tropical infections

Tropical infections include donovanosis, lymphogranu-
Serological tests for syphilis loma venereum and chancroid.
There are two groups of serological tests for syphilis: The diagnosis of donovanosis is based upon the 
1.	 Non-specific/cardiolipin: demonstration of Donovan bodies, which stain in a 

○	 anticardiolipin antibody, such as Venereal bipolar fashion giving a ‘safety pin’ appearance within 
Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) and the cytoplasm of mononuclear cells in a Giemsa-
rapid plasma reagin (RPR). stained tissue smear. Tissue is obtained by infiltrating 

2.	 Specific antitreponemal antibody tests: the edge of the ulcer with 1% lidocaine and removing 
○	 treponemal enzyme immunoassay (EIA) a small piece from the edge, which is then smeared 
○	 T. pallidum particle agglutination (TPPA) onto a glass slide or crushed between two glass slides. 
○	 T. pallidum haemagglutination (TPHA) If chancroid or lymphogranuloma venereum is sus-
○	 T. pallidum line immunoassay (LIA) pected, culture or NAAT for Haemophilus ducreyi 
○	 fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption and Chlamydia trachomatis of the lymphogranuloma 

(FTA-abs). venereum serovars, respectively, may be indicated 
The titre of the non-specific tests indicates disease using material obtained from the ulcer or bubo.

activity and is useful for following up patients, par-
ticularly those who have been treated for primary, Further management
secondary or early latent syphilis, when the test should The diagnosis should be explained to the patient, 
become negative or sustain a greater than two-fold antimicrobial treatment given according to current 



SECTION Three
375

Urogenital system ﻿
guidelines, partner notification done and advice given countries, especially in Africa. HIV infection is cat-
on risk reduction strategies for the future. egorized as A, B and C (Box 17.7), based broadly on 

In the United Kingdom the British Association for the clinical evolution of the immunodeficiency state 
Sexual Health and HIV (BASHH) guidelines are that leads to the development of the acquired immune 
used. These can be found at www.bashh.org. deficiency syndrome (AIDS), on average some 8-15 

years after infection if untreated.
HIV infection ■	 Acute primary illness – with fever, malaise, 

lymphadenopathy, muscle pain and sore throat, 
The worldwide spread of HIV infection has resulted often with an erythematous, maculopapular  
in a dramatic lowering of life expectancy in some rash and headache. Night sweats, weight loss, 

Box 17.7  Centre for Disease Control (CDC) HIV clinical categories
Category A: asymptomatic
■	 Acute infection
■	 Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
Category B: symptomatic infection excluding category A
■	 Bacteria:

–	 bacillary angiomatosis
–	 listeriosis

■	 Candidiasis – oropharyngeal, vulvovaginal (persistent or resistant to therapy)
■	 Viral:

–	 herpes zoster (≥2 episodes or >1 dermatome)
–	 oral hairy leukoplakia

■	 Constitutional symptoms: fever (>38.5°C), diarrhoea >1 month
■	 Other:

–	 cervical dysplasia – moderate or severe
–	 idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
–	 pelvic inflammatory disease
–	 peripheral neuropathy

Category C: AIDS-defining illness
■	 Bacteria:

–	 Mycobacterium tuberculosis – pulmonary, extrapulmonary
–	 Mycobacterium avium complex, M. kansasii or other mycobacterial infection – disseminated or extrapulmonary disease
–	 pneumonia – recurrent (≥2 episodes in 12 months)
–	 Salmonella septicaemia, recurrent (non-typhoid)

■	 Fungal:
–	 candidiasis – oesophagus, trachea, bronchi, lungs
–	 coccidioidomycosis – disseminated or extrapulmonary
–	 cryptococcosis – extrapulmonary
–	 histoplasmosis – disseminated or extrapulmonary
–	 Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia

■	 Helminth: strongyloidosis – extraintestinal
■	 Protozoal:

–	 cryptosporidiosis – chronic intestinal (>1 month)
–	 isosporiasis – chronic intestinal (>1 month)
–	 toxoplasmosis of brain

■	 Viral:
–	 cytomegalovirus infection (other than liver, spleen or lymph node)
–	 HIV encephalopathy
–	 wasting syndrome (involuntary weight loss >10% of baseline weight) associated with chronic diarrhoea (≥2 loose stools 

per day ≥1 month) or chronic weakness and documented fever ≥1 month
–	 herpes simplex – chronic ulcers >1 month, bronchitis, pneumonitis, oesophagitis
–	 progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy

■	 Tumours:
–	 cervical carcinoma, invasive
–	 Kaposi’s sarcoma
–	 lymphoma – Burkitt’s, immunoblastic or primary nervous system



376 17 Urogenital system ﻿

Primary infection Asymptomatic; persistent Symptomatic; mild to AIDS, defining
CDC category A generalized lymphadenopathy moderate illness illness

CDC category A CDC category B CDC category C

1000

900
CD4

800
107

700

106 600

500
105

400

104 300

HIV-RNA 200
103

100

102 0
0 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

Months Survival in years

Figure 17.20  The clinical categories associated with untreated HIV infection and survival can be loosely correlated with the plasma 
HIV-RNA and circulating CD4 T-lymphocyte count. Treatment with antiretrovirals and prophylaxis for opportunistic infections increases 
survival and can prevent or delay the progression to AIDS. 

diarrhoea, meningism, neuropathy and oral 
thrush may occur. There is HIV viraemia and 
severe immunosuppression, indicated by a high 
plasma HIV-RNA and a low CD4 T-lymphocyte 
count.

■	 Asymptomatic phase (category A) – following 
the acute infection (primary HIV or acute 
seroconversion infection), the patient may be 
asymptomatic, or there may be persistent 
lymphadenopathy; the HIV-RNA decreases and 
the CD4 T-lymphocyte count increases and 
stabilizes (Fig. 17.20) to a baseline level.

■	 Symptomatic phase (category B).
■	 AIDS-defining illnesses (category C) – especially 

opportunistic infections such as tuberculosis and 
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, and neoplasms 
such as Kaposi’s sarcoma (Fig. 17.20) and Figure 17.21  Lipodystrophy with abdominal adiposity and thin 
lymphoma. arm resulting from protease inhibitor treatment. Hyperlipidaemia 

Assessment of the patient with HIV infection should and insulin resistance may be present. 
cover the extent of the disease and its complications. 
Multisystem involvement is common, and in each infections. Antiretroviral drug therapy may itself cause 
system there may be multiple causes. Examination serious complications (Fig. 17.21).
of the mouth and the skin may provide clues that a In the United Kingdom up to 25% of those with 
patient is immunosuppressed. Common chest infec- HIV are unaware they have the infection and this 
tions include tuberculosis, Pneumocystis and other percentage could be higher in other parts of the 
bacterial pneumonias. Common cerebral lesions world. Late diagnosis, with CD4 counts below 200, 
include toxoplasmosis, tuberculoma, other bacterial are not uncommon. Multiple organ involvement and 
or fungal abscesses and lymphoma. Diarrhoea may complex symptomatology is not uncommon, making 
be caused by HIV, drug treatment or opportunistic systemic examination crucial.

Plasma HIV-RNA (copies/ml)

CD4 -T-lymphocyte count (cells/mm3)



SECTION Three
377

Urogenital system ﻿

Figure 17.23  White plaques of oral candidiasis (which can be 
scraped off to reveal an erythematous base) in an HIV-positive 
patient. 

Figure 17.22  Kaposi’s sarcoma of the lower legs with ankle 
oedema in a patient with AIDS. 

medication. The exact combination offered will 
depend on the HIV genotype and resistance test 
results, HLA B5701 status, patient lifestyle factors 

Signs commonly seen in late HIV infection and of course the affordability of these medications.
■	 Kaposi’s sarcoma Fig. 17.22
■	 oropharyngeal thrush Fig. 17.23 Mother-to-child transmission

Mother-to-child transmission can be kept at very low 
Blood tests done to assess an HIV-positive levels (<2%) by the appropriate medical interventions 
patient being put into place. These include treating the mother 
■	 HIV viral load – to measure viral activity. This with highly active antiretroviral medication so that 

value should decrease to below the level of her viral load is undetectable at the time of delivery, 
detection with effective treatment. ensuring the appropriate obstetric care is in place, 

■	 CD4 count – to assess the patient’s immune giving the mother the appropriate advice around 
status. At CD4 counts below 200 the risk of breast feeding and ensuring the baby gets the appropri-
AIDS-defining conditions is increased ate post-exposure prophylaxis.
significantly. The CD4 count normally increases As maternal HIV IgG crosses the placenta, the 
once the patient starts effective treatment. baby will need to be tested using HIV viral PCR to 

Very recently there has been a consensus around ensure that they are and remain HIV negative. The 
the timing of HIV treatment initiation. The current last test normally occurs when the baby is about 18 
guidelines say that HIV treatment with highly active months old.
antiretroviral therapy should be offered to anyone Further detailed guidelines are found at www. 
who is HIV positive and willing to take the lifelong BHIVA.org.uk.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Endocrine and metabolic 
disorders 18 

Tahseen A. Chowdhury and William M. Drake

Introduction feature of psychogenic polydipsia, but this is not an 
absolute distinction and further investigation of urine 

The endocrine system comprises the classic endocrine concentrating capacity is usually required.
organs:
■	 Hypothalamus/pituitary Weight loss
■	 Thyroid Loss of weight is a feature of decreased food intake 
■	 Parathyroid or increased metabolic rate. Sometimes both factors 
■	 Adrenal may operate to reduce body weight, as in the 
■	 Pancreatic islet cells cachexia of malignant disease. Thyroid overactivity 
■	 Gonads (hyperthyroidism) is nearly always associated with 

The mode of presentation of endocrine disorders a combination of unintentional or effortless weight 
does not fit neatly into a system-based model, the loss and increased appetite, although occasionally 
symptoms rarely being specific to a particular system. the latter may be stimulated more than the former 
Frequently, endocrine disease is suggested by a constel- so that there is a paradoxical increase in weight. 
lation of non-specific symptoms. Weight loss is rarely the sole presenting symptom 

of hyperthyroidism and other clinical features often 
predominate, particularly in younger patients (Box 

The endocrine history 18.1). In the elderly, however, hyperthyroidism may 
be occult or may simulate the gradual weight loss of 

As in other systems, the history consists of presenting malignant disease. Cardiac arrhythmias are a frequent 
symptoms, the history of the development of the feature in the elderly. Anorexia nervosa, a psychogenic 
illness and the family history. disorder characterized by a long history of low body 

weight in the absence of other features of ill health, 
Presenting symptoms must be considered, especially in young women. 

Any form of weight loss may be associated with 
There are a number of symptom complexes that amenorrhoea.
particularly suggest endocrine disease. Other endocrine conditions in which weight loss 

is a major feature are listed in Box 18.2.
Thirst and polyuria
Excessive thirst (polydipsia) and increased urine Weight gain or redistribution
output (polyuria) are the most important presenting An increase in body weight (Box 18.3) is a predictable 
symptoms of diabetes mellitus; these are discussed result of a reduction in metabolic rate. Weight gain is 
in detail below. Polydipsia and polyuria may also be therefore a common feature of primary hypothyroidism. 
due to impairment of renal concentrating capacity However, obesity is rarely a consequence of specific 
as a result of a deficiency of antidiuretic hormone endocrine dysfunction, an exception being the very 
(cranial diabetes insipidus) or a failure of antidiuretic rare phenomenon of leptin deficiency. In the majority 
hormone action (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus). of patients, ‘simple obesity’ is due to a long-standing 
The latter may be inherited or may occur secondary imbalance between energy intake and expenditure; it 
to impairment of antidiuretic hormone action by frequently begins in childhood and is often present 
hypercalcaemia or hypokalaemia. Sometimes apparent in more than one family member. Glucocorticoid 
polydipsia and polyuria may be due to increased fluid hormone excess (Cushing’s syndrome) results in an 
intake, which at its most extreme may be vastly increase in body fat predominantly involving abdomi-
excessive (psychogenic polydipsia). The distinction nal, omental and interscapular fat (truncal obesity), 
between psychogenic polydipsia and diabetes insipidus with paradoxical thinning of the limbs due to muscle 
is important. Generally, nocturnal polyuria is not a atrophy.



380 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Box 18.1  Clinical features of hyperthyroidism Box 18.5  Conditions in which temperature intolerance is 
a feature

■	 Tachycardia
■	 Atrial fibrillation/heart failure ■	 Intolerance to cold: hypothyroidism
■	 Eye signs ■	 Intolerance to heat: hyperthyroidism
■	 Lid lag
■	 Lid retraction
■	 Exophthalmos (Graves’ disease)
■	 Sweating Box 18.6  Clinical features of hypothyroidism
■	 Thyroid gland enlargement and bruit (Graves’ disease)

■	 Weight gain
■	 Fine distal tremor

■	 Sallow complexion and dry skin
■	 Thinning of hair

■	 Thinning of scalp and lateral eyebrow hair
■	 Proximal weakness; cannot rise from squat

■	 Cold intolerance
■	 Chorea

■	 Deepened, gruff voice
■	 Slow physical and mental activity
■	 Unsteadiness and slightly slurred speech

Box 18.2  Endocrine and metabolic diseases in which ■	 Tingling in toes and fingers
weight loss is a clinical feature ■	 Aching muscles with cramp

■	 Mild proximal weakness
■	 Hyperthyroidism ■	 Slow pulse and shortness of breath
■	 Type 1 diabetes mellitus
■	 Hypopituitarism
■	 Adrenocortical failure (Addison’s disease)
■	 Anorexia nervosa climbing stairs, boarding a bus or rising from a sitting 

position. Most patients with hyperthyroidism have 
proximal weakness. This may be subclinical; it is best 
demonstrated by asking the patient to rise from the 

Box 18.3  Conditions in which increased body weight is  squatting position. The proximal myopathy of vitamin 
a feature D deficiency is often painful, in contrast to other 

■	 Simple obesity: energy intake/expenditure imbalance causes. The differential diagnosis of painful proximal 
■	 Primary hypothyroidism muscular weakness includes polymyositis and poly-
■	 Cushing’s syndrome myalgia rheumatica, as well as spinal root or plexus 
■	 Hypothalamic lesions disease.
■	 Leptin deficiency Cold intolerance

An abnormal sensation of cold, out of proportion to 
that experienced by other individuals, may indicate 

Box 18.4  Conditions in which metabolic myopathy is  underlying hypothyroidism (Boxes 18.5 and 18.6). 
a feature This symptom differs from the localized vasomotor 

Painless symptoms in the hands found in Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon and is rather non-specific, especially in 

■	 Hyperthyroidism
■	 Cushing’s syndrome, including iatrogenic steroid the elderly.

myopathy Heat intolerance
■	 Acromegaly

The increased metabolic rate of thyrotoxicosis may 
Painful be associated with heat intolerance in which, at its 
■	 Vitamin D deficiency most extreme, the patient is comfortable at an ambient 
■	 Osteomalacia temperature that others find unpleasantly cold. This 
■	 Hypothyroidism is an important symptom, highly specific for thyroid 

overactivity, which may partly explain some of the 
seasonal variation in presentation of the condition.

Muscle weakness
Symptomatic muscular weakness not due to neurologi- Increased sweating
cal disease is a feature of several metabolic disorders, Hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating) may be a consti-
including thyrotoxicosis, Cushing’s syndrome and tutional abnormality, characterized by onset in 
vitamin D deficiency. In all these conditions, the childhood or adolescence and sometimes by a family 
metabolic myopathy (Box 18.4) causes symmetrical history. A recent increase in sweat secretion, on the 
proximal weakness, mainly involving the shoulder other hand, may be an early indication of thyroid 
and hip girdle musculature. There is usually associated overactivity. Paroxysmal sweating is a common feature 
muscle wasting. The major symptom is difficulty in of anxiety. Increased catecholamine secretion from 



SECTION Three
381

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
a phaeochromocytoma of the adrenal medulla is a For example, severe dysthyroid eye disease and orbital 
rare cause of hyperhidrosis. Intermittent sweating or retro-orbital tumours may present in this way. 
after meals (gustatory hyperhidrosis) may occur in Bitemporal hemianopia (bilateral loss of part or all of 
patients with autonomic dysfunction. Growth the temporal fields of vision), often asymmetrical or 
hormone excess (acromegaly) also increases sweating, incongruous, is a major feature of suprasellar extension 
perhaps because of hypertrophy of the sweat glands, of pituitary adenomas compressing the optic chiasm 
and this feature can be used to assess the activity of but may occur in other tumours in this location. 
the disease in the clinic. Increased sweating should Double vision (diplopia) on lateral or upward gaze 
be distinguished from flushing that occurs physiologi- often results from medial or lateral rectus muscle 
cally at the time of the natural menopause. Flushing tethering in dysthyroid eye disease. Apparent magnifica-
may be a presenting feature of serotonin-secreting tion of vision (macropsia) can occur in hypoglycaemia.
carcinoid tumours of the gut and usually indicates 
extensive disease with hepatic metastases. Fasting symptoms

Tachycardia, sweating and tremor occurring intermit-
Tremor tently, especially when fasting, are suggestive of 
A fine rapid resting tremor is one of the cardinal hypoglycaemia. These symptoms resemble those 
clinical features of thyrotoxicosis. This must be associated with the increased sympathetic drive found 
distinguished from the coarser and more irregular in states of fear or with excess secretion of noradrena-
tremor of anxiety, which is usually associated with line (norepinephrine), as in phaeochromocytoma. In 
a cool peripheral skin temperature, in contrast to the severe persistent hypoglycaemia, these symptoms 
warm skin of the thyrotoxic patient. Tremor due to may progress to decreased consciousness. This is a 
neurological disease is greater in amplitude, slower serious emergency implying neuroglycopenia sufficient 
in rate, and may be present at rest, as in Parkinson’s to impair brain function. Spontaneous or fasting 
disease, or on movement, as in cerebellar tremor. It hypoglycaemia can be due to the following:
therefore rarely simulates thyrotoxic tremor. Essential ■	 Autonomous insulin production due to an 
tremor is not so rapid as thyrotoxic tremor, is variable insulinoma
and is worse in certain postures. It often involves the ■	 Glucocorticoid deficiency, with or without 
head and neck. thyroxine and growth hormone deficiency (e.g. 

primary adrenal failure or hypopituitarism)
Palpitations ■	 Inappropriate insulin or excessive sulphonylurea 
Palpitations are a heightened, unpleasant awareness drug administration in a diabetic patient
of the heart beat. They may be a feature of thyro- ■	 Rarer causes of hypoglycaemia, for example 
toxicosis but are more likely to be due to anxiety. hepatic failure and rapidly growing malignant 
Awareness of the heartbeat while lying down is lesions, especially thoracic or retroperitoneal 
normal. Other causes of rapid heart rate include mesothelial tumours secreting proinsulin-like 
paroxysmal tachyarrhythmias. The sensation of growth factor II
intermittent forceful cardiac contraction, sometimes 
described by the patient as a missed beat, is often Cramps and ‘pins and needles’
due to a compensatory pause following an ectopic Intermittent cramps and ‘pins and needles’ (par-
beat and is usually a normal phenomenon. aesthesiae), especially if bilateral, can be due to a 

decreased level of circulating ionized calcium. This 
Postural unsteadiness may occur in hypoparathyroidism or be associated 
Dizziness, or a sensation of faintness on standing, with a fall in the ionized component of serum calcium 
should prompt measurement of lying and standing because of an increased extracellular pH (alkalosis). 
blood pressure. Postural hypotension, a fall of diastolic The latter may occur with any alkalosis but is par-
blood pressure on standing, occurs with reduced blood ticularly well recognized in hyperventilatory states 
volume. In the absence of obvious bleeding or gastro- (respiratory alkalosis) and hypokalaemia (metabolic 
intestinal fluid loss, adrenal insufficiency should be alkalosis). Refractory cramping symptoms after cor-
considered. Postural hypotension is frequently due rection of hypocalcaemia can be due to an associated 
to autonomic neuropathy, especially in long-standing hypomagnesaemia. However, the differential diagnosis 
diabetes mellitus. It is also a common complication of paraesthesiae in the hands includes median nerve 
of any drug therapy for essential hypertension. The compression at the wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome), 
drug history is particularly important in the elderly a syndrome that is usually accompanied by typical 
patient with dizziness. sensory and motor disturbance suggestive of a lesion 

in the median nerve (see Ch. 16).
Visual disturbance
Several endocrine conditions may cause visual Nausea
symptoms. Decreased visual acuity may be due to This is a rare symptom of endocrine disease. It is an 
space-occupying lesions compressing the optic nerve. important presenting feature of adrenal insufficiency, 



382 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
in which typically it is maximal in the morning and ■	 Decreased blood supply to the penis (e.g. 
may be associated with vomiting. Similar symptoms atherosclerosis)
may occur with severe hypercalcaemia and may be ■	 Neural dysfunction (e.g. autonomic neuropathy 
the sole manifestation of this condition. These two complicating diabetes)
conditions should be considered early in the differ- ■	 Testosterone deficiency (e.g. hypopituitarism 
ential diagnosis of a patient presenting with upper and primary testicular failure)
gastrointestinal symptoms in the absence of demon- ■	 Hyperprolactinaemia
strable structural disease. Occasionally, thyrotoxicosis ■	 Drug therapy (e.g. certain antihypertensives)
may present with nausea and vomiting, although ■	 Psychological factors
looseness of stools is the more common gastrointestinal ■	 A combination of several causes
manifestation of this condition. It is often difficult to distinguish with certainty 

between impotence due to organic factors and that 
Dysphagia which is psychological, although total erectile failure 
Difficulty in swallowing is an unusual manifestation of and the absence of nocturnal and morning erections 
endocrine disease but may be the presenting feature suggest a physical cause. Impotence in a diabetic 
of multinodular thyroid enlargement with retrosternal patient should not be assumed to be inevitably due 
extension. Smaller goitres only rarely result in dyspha- to autonomic neuropathy, and other causes should 
gia. Severe hyperthyroidism with generalized weakness be considered. Most importantly, it should be recog-
may be associated with a reversible myopathy of the nized that male impotence is often complicated by 
pharyngeal musculature and consequent dysphagia. a psychological disturbance, which may serve to 

exacerbate the problem.
Neck pain and swelling Gynaecomastia
Superficial discomfort in the neck may lead to the Gynaecomastia refers to a smooth, firm, mobile, often 
incidental finding of thyroid enlargement. Modest tender disc of breast tissue under the areola in the 
degrees of thyroid enlargement are very common, male. It should be distinguished from the soft, fatty 
whereas pain arising from the thyroid is comparatively enlargement often seen in obesity. Mild gynaecomastia 
unusual. The most common cause of local discomfort (sometimes unilateral or asymmetrical) frequently 
and tenderness in the neck is inflammatory lymphad- occurs as a temporary phenomenon in normal puberty 
enopathy. Severe tenderness of the thyroid itself, and may persist for several years or sometimes 
especially when accompanied by fever and signs of indefinitely. In adults, gynaecomastia may result from:
thyrotoxicosis, suggests a diagnosis of viral subacute 

■	 excess oestrogen stimulation
thyroiditis (de Quervain’s thyroiditis). Occasionally, 

■	 reduction in circulating androgen
autoimmune thyroiditis may give rise to pain and 

■	 antagonism of androgen action
tenderness, which mimics a viral thyroiditis but is 

■	 androgen insensitivity (Box 18.7).
less severe. The sudden onset of localized pain and Clinical assessment of the patient with gynaeco-
swelling in the thyroid is indicative of bleeding into mastia should therefore include an enquiry about 
a pre-existing thyroid nodule and is a recognized any change in libido and examination of thyroid 
complication of multinodular goitre. The symptoms 
are self-limiting. Painless enlargement of the thyroid 
gland (goitre) presents either with pressure effects, Box 18.7  Causes of gynaecomastia
resulting in dysphagia progressing to tracheal compres-
sion and stridor, or cosmetic disturbance. The Increased oestrogen/testosterone ratio

underlying cause of thyroid enlargement is often ■	 Chronic liver disease
difficult to establish. The family history and subse- ■	 Thyrotoxicosis
quent investigation may point to autoimmune ■	 Phenytoin therapy
thyroiditis or dyshormonogenesis. A history of rapid Androgen receptor antagonists
enlargement of the gland, especially in an elderly ■	 Spironolactone, digoxin
patient, suggests an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. 
Coexisting severe diarrhoea points towards a diagnosis Inherited androgen receptor defects
of medullary carcinoma of the thyroid. In the dif- ■	 Testicular feminization syndrome
ferential diagnosis, goitrogenic drugs, for example Testosterone deficiency or oestrogen excess
lithium, should be considered, as should residence ■	 Primary and secondary hypogonadism
in an iodine-deficient area. Previous exposure to neck ■	 Tumour production of human chorionic gonadotrophin 
irradiation or to radioactive iodine in childhood may (hCG)
also be important. ■	 Oestrogen production by Leydig cell tumour of testis

Impotence Congenital and hereditary
■

Reduced erectile potency may be a consequence of 	 X-linked spinal muscular atrophy (Kennedy syndrome)
■

primary abnormalities, such as the following: 	 Klinefelter’s syndrome (karyotype XXY)



SECTION Three
383

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
status, the genitalia, the muscles and for stigmata of The history is vital in the clinical assessment. If 
chronic liver disease. the symptoms commenced shortly after the menarche, 

then a tumour source of androgen is unlikely. A 
Amenorrhoea regular menstrual cycle is good evidence against 
The term amenorrhoea describes absence of menstrual severe androgen excess but does not exclude polycystic 
periods (menses). Perhaps the most common cause ovary syndrome. Increased libido suggests substantially 
of failure of onset of menses (primary amenorrhoea) increased androgen secretion, which may be either 
is physiological delay of puberty, a diagnosis that can ovarian or neoplastic in origin.
only be made with certainty in retrospect. Important 
pathological causes include: Bowel disturbance
■	 hypothalamic–pituitary dysfunction (e.g. due to Constipation and abdominal distension may be 

tumours) features of hypothyroidism, hypercalcaemia or 
■	 ovarian failure (e.g. failure of normal ovarian panhypopituitarism. Diarrhoea may occur as part of 

development or cytotoxic chemotherapy) autonomic neuropathy involving the gut in diabetes 
■	 thyroid dysfunction mellitus. Peptic ulceration may occur in Zollinger–
■	 defects in lower genital tract development. Ellison syndrome, in which gastrin-secreting tumours 

Important diagnostic pointers in the history include of the gut result in increased gastric acid secretion.
symptoms suggestive of thyroid disease, or any visual 
disability that might indicate compression of the optic Skin changes
chiasm by a hypothalamic or pituitary tumour. Second- Pallor often occurs in primary testicular failure and 
ary amenorrhoea (cessation of previously established in panhypopituitarism. Excessive pigmentation occurs 
menses) has similar causes. In addition, marked weight in adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)-dependent 
loss may lead to amenorrhoea, as in anorexia nervosa Cushing’s syndrome, and increased sebum production 
or inflammatory bowel disease. Amenorrhoea or causing greasy skin and acne on the face and shoulders 
oligomenorrhoea (infrequent scanty periods) may may occur in all causes of glucocorticoid excess. In 
occur in women subject to excessively rigorous physi- carcinoid tumours of the gut or lung, increased 
cal training programmes. Normal pregnancy is the humoral secretion results in a violaceous cyanosis-like 
most common cause of secondary amenorrhoea. skin discoloration. A variegate, patchy rash is a feature 

of porphyria, an inherited abnormality of haem 
Galactorrhoea metabolism. In primary hypoadrenalism, there is 
Occasionally, physiological lactation may persist after increased pigmentation of the conjunctival membrane 
breastfeeding has ceased. Inappropriate lactation is beneath the eyelids and of the inside of the mouth, 
usually bilateral. There are a number of causes, which the axillae and the palmar skin creases. In hypothyroid-
include the following: ism, the skin appears dry, pale, sallow or even slightly 
■	 Prolactin-secreting tumours of the pituitary gland yellow, scalp hair is coarse and lateral eyebrow hair 
■	 Idiopathic galactorrhoea, in which there is an is thinned. In hyperthyroidism, the skin is dry and 

apparent increased sensitivity to normal levels hot but often not flushed. In hypocalcaemia, the nails 
of serum prolactin are friable. In uraemia, the skin is pale or yellow and 

■	 Hyperprolactinaemia due to hypothyroidism slightly pigmented, and in terminal uraemia, a ‘uraemic 
■	 Hyperprolactinaemia due to dopamine frost’ may appear on the skin.

antagonist drugs Vitiligo, a patchy depigmentation of the skin, is 
■	 Hyperprolactinaemia due to lactotroph common in association with many autoimmune 

disinhibiting lesions of the hypothalamopituitary disorders, particularly autoimmune hypothyroidism 
region and vitamin B12 deficiency.

Inappropriate secretion of breast milk should 
therefore always prompt enquiry for symptoms refer- Family history
able to the thyroid and pituitary glands, and a thorough The family background in endocrine or metabolic 
drug history should be taken. Even with very high disease may be particularly useful in the evaluation 
prolactin levels, galactorrhoea is rare in men. of several of the more common disorders. It is also 

particularly important in the assessment of less 
Excess hair growth common inherited disorders of metabolism.
An increase in the growth of facial and body hair in 
adult females is a relatively common symptom and Thyroid disease
may be due to increased circulating androgens. Autoimmune hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism 
However, it is most commonly a normal, constitutional frequently show familial aggregation. Dyshormono-
characteristic. Pathological causes of hirsutism include: genetic goitre is also often inherited. A family history 
■	 polycystic ovary syndrome of organ-specific autoimmune disease (e.g. pernicious 
■	 late presentation of congenital adrenal hyperplasia anaemia, vitiligo, Addison’s disease) may also point 
■	 androgen-secreting ovarian or adrenal tumours. to an autoimmune aetiology of thyroid disease.



384 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Figure 18.1  Typical facial appearance of Cushing’s syndrome. 
Note the increased fat deposition and the plethoric appearance. 
The patient presented with a 2-year history of secondary infertility, 
easy bruising and central adiposity. A

Renal calculi
Primary hyperparathyroidism, an important cause of 
renal stones, may be familial, occurring either as an 
isolated disorder or as a part of the syndrome of 
multiple endocrine neoplasia (type I).

The examination
General assessment
This should begin with observing the general appear-
ance of the patient. Start by assessing the state of B
nutrition and by measuring weight and height. 
Calculate the body mass index (BMI). The distribution Figure 18.2  The facial (A) and hand (B) appearance of 
of fat should be noted. Deposition of fat in the intra- acromegaly. There is overgrowth of the facial skeleton, coarsening 

of features and an increase in soft tissues, most obvious in the 
abdominal, thyrocervical and interscapular regions hands. The patient had a 4-year history of excessive sweating, 
with relative sparing of the limbs (truncal obesity) increased shoe size, frontal headache and ‘pins and needles in 
is characteristic of Cushing’s syndrome and is accom- fingers’. 
panied by a typical moon-faced plethoric appearance 
(Fig. 18.1) because of a combination of increased 
subcutaneous fat and thinning of the skin. before epiphyseal fusion causes abnormally tall stature 

Patients with growth hormone hypersecretion (gigantism). Increased adiposity in a child who is 
resulting from somatotroph pituitary adenomas also growing poorly suggests the possibility of growth 
demonstrate a classic facial appearance, with increased hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism or, rarely, 
fullness and coarsening of soft tissues, including the Cushing’s syndrome. Simple obesity is associated 
lips and tongue which, in patients with long-standing with normal or increased linear growth velocity.
disease, may be accompanied by overgrowth of the The skeletal proportions should be noted: a long-
zygoma, orbital ridges and mandible (prognathism) limbed appearance may indicate delayed epiphyseal 
(Fig. 18.2). Acromegaly in young people occurring fusion due to hypogonadism (eunuchoidism) or the 



SECTION Three
385

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Figure 18.3  The hands in pseudohypoparathyroidism. Note the 
characteristic shortening of the fourth and fifth metacarpals. 

Figure 18.4  Circumoral pigmentation in a patient with 
hypersecretion of ACTH. 

connective tissue abnormality Marfan syndrome. A 
eunuchoid body habitus is confirmed by demonstrating 
that the leg length (top of symphysis pubis to ground) 
exceeds the sitting height or that the span exceeds 
the total height. Shortening of the limbs occurs with 
a variety of skeletal dysplasias.

The cytogenetic disorder Turner syndrome (karyo-
type 45XO), which is characterized by gonadal 
dysgenesis and the variable presence of other visceral 
abnormalities, has a typical phenotypic appearance, 
including short stature, failure of secondary sexual 
development, decreased or absent secondary sexual 
hair, an increase in the normal angulation between 
the humerus and the lower arm, a low posterior 
hairline and an exaggerated fold of skin between the 
neck and shoulder. It is most important that accurate 
wall-mounted stadiometers be used in the assessment 
of normal growth and its possible disorders.

The hands should be carefully examined for evi-
dence of finger clubbing which, among other things, 
may be a rare manifestation of thyrotoxic Graves’ Figure 18.5  Extensive areas of depigmentation (vitiligo) in a 
disease (thyroid acropachy). Palmar erythema may patient with organ-specific autoimmune disease. 

also be found in thyrotoxicosis of any cause as well 
as in patients with chronic liver disease or rheumatoid 
arthritis, and in pregnancy.

A unique selective shortening of the fourth and 
fifth metacarpals may be found as the major somatic 
manifestation of a group of recessively inherited 
disorders of parathormone action (pseudohypopar-
athyroidism; Fig. 18.3).

The skin
Pigmentation, especially buccal, circumoral or palmar, 
may indicate the increased secretion of ACTH that 
occurs with adrenal failure (Addison’s disease; Fig. 
18.4); patches of depigmentation, or vitiligo (Fig. 
18.5), may also be found in Addison’s disease or 
other organ-specific autoimmune disorders. Violaceous 
striae, arising as a result of stretching of thin skin 
with exposure of the dermal capillary circulation, 
suggest the possibility of glucocorticoid excess (Fig. 
18.6), and abnormal dryness of the skin and coarseness Figure 18.6  Violaceous striae typical of Cushing’s syndrome. 



386 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
apparently asymmetrical. There are several methods 
for examining the thyroid, but a suggested routine 
is as follows.

With the patient’s neck slightly extended, inspect 
the area below the cricoid cartilage. Ask him to take 
a sip of water, extend the neck again and swallow. 
Watch for the superior movement of the gland, 
carefully noting its contour and any asymmetry.

Thyroid palpation is best carried out from behind, 
with the patient’s neck slightly extended, but not so 
much that the neck musculature is tightened. This 
may feel awkward initially, but with time and practice 
it will become more comfortable. Have a glass of 
water available throughout the examination so the 
patient may take repeated sips and swallow as neces-
sary. Position both hands to encircle the neck (Fig. 
18.8A) with the fingers slightly flexed, such that the 
tips of the index fingers lie just below the cricoid in 
order to palpate the isthmus. Now rotate the fingers 
down and slightly laterally in order to feel the lateral 
lobes, including the inferior border (Fig. 18.8B). The 
anterior surface of each lobe should be no larger than 

Figure 18.7  The facial appearance of hypothyroidism. The the terminal phalanx of the patient’s thumb.
patient demonstrates periorbital puffiness and coarsening of scalp The following points should be addressed:
hair. (Figure 14.18 in Jarvis C: Physical examination & health ■	 Is the thyroid diffusely enlarged, as in thyroid 
assessment, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders, p 295.) stimulating hormone (TSH)-mediated or 

autoimmune enlargement (Fig. 18.8D)? If so,  
is it soft (e.g. dyshormogenesis, diffuse goitre  
of puberty) or firm/hard (e.g. autoimmune 

of the hair are found in hypothyroidism (Fig. 18.7). thyroiditis). In general, the firmer the texture  
Localized thickening of the dermis due to mucopoly- of an enlarged thyroid, the more likely is the 
saccharide and inflammatory cell deposition, particu- pathology to be autoimmune.
larly on the anterior aspects of the legs when it is ■	 Are there two or more identifiable nodules  
known as pretibial myxoedema, is one of the classic (Fig. 18.8E, Fig. 18.9) and, if so, is the patient 
but relatively rare extrathyroidal manifestations of thyrotoxic and does the gland extend downward 
Graves’ disease. behind the sternum? (If the gland is partially  

In females, dermatological examination should also or completely retrosternal, the inferior border 
include attention to any abnormality of hair distribu- may not be palpable or palpable only on 
tion, either excess hair growth in an androgen- swallowing.) Most multinodular goitres are 
dependent distribution (hirsutism) or hair loss in a benign, but a history of neck irradiation, 
male pattern, both of which may indicate increased enlarged cervical lymph nodes or progressive 
circulating androgen and should prompt examination enlargement of one of the nodules raises the 
for evidence of virilization (see below). suspicion of malignancy.

■	 Is the palpable abnormality a single focal nodule 
The thyroid (Fig. 18.8F), suggesting a cyst, adenoma or 

carcinoma? Rapid growth, hard texture, lack of 
The anatomical landmarks relevant to inspection and movement on swallowing (see above), enlarged 
palpation of the thyroid are shown in Fig. 18.8. regional lymphadenopathy, male gender and a 
Immediately inferior to the thyroid cartilage (with history of neck irradiation all increase the 
its superior notch) is the cricoid cartilage, with the probability of malignancy.
thyroid isthmus lying just below in the midline. The ■	 Is the goitre firm and asymmetrical?
right and left lobes of the thyroid curve posterolater- ■	 Are there features of local pressure effects or 
ally around the trachea and oesophagus and are local infiltration (e.g. dysphonia from recurrent 
partially covered by the sternomastoid muscles. The laryngeal involvement)?
attachment of the thyroid to the pretracheal fascia ■	 Are there weight loss and debility? These 
dictates that it moves superiorly on swallowing; suggest anaplastic carcinoma or lymphoma.
absence of this movement raises the possibility of an ■	 Is there a bruit, indicating increased blood 
infiltrative thyroid carcinoma. Remember that the supply? This is frequently found in untreated 
right lobe is slightly larger than the left; hence, diffuse Graves’ disease but should not be confused with 
thyroid enlargement, as in Graves’ disease, is often a transmitted bruit from the carotid.



SECTION Three
387

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

The cardiovascular system length, as determined by electrocardiography. A 
hyperdynamic circulation, sinus tachycardia or atrial 

Particular attention should be paid to any postural fibrillation may be found in thyrotoxicosis; this may 
drop in blood pressure. This may indicate a depleted progress to cardiac decompensation and cardiac failure.
extracellular fluid volume, for example in patients 
with adrenal insufficiency, or autonomic dysfunction, The breasts and genitalia
the commonest cause of which is diabetes mellitus. 
Additional indicators of the latter include failure of A detailed description of growth and pubertal develop-
reflex bradycardia during the Valsalva manoeuvre ment is beyond the scope of this chapter. In brief, 
and loss of beat-to-beat variation in cardiac cycle however, in the average adolescent female, pubertal 

A Feeling the isthmus

B Feeling the lateral lobes

Hyoid bone

Sternomastoid muscle Thyroid cartilage

Trachea Cricoid cartilage

Lobe
Clavicle Thyroid gland

Isthmus

Manubrium of Sternal notch
the sternum

C

Figure 18.8  Examination of the thyroid. (A) Feeling the isthmus; (B) feeling the lateral lobes; (C) anatomical landmarks; 



388 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
Figure 18.8, cont’d (D) diffuse 
enlargement; (E) multinodular goitre;  
(F) single nodule. 

D

E

F

development usually commences between the ages the adolescent female, physiological breast enlarge-
of 10 and 11 and takes 3 to 4 years to complete. A ment provides a precise index of pubertal status and 
growth spurt starts about 1 year before breast develop- signals the onset of the pubertal growth spurt (Tanner 
ment, peak height velocity is reached on average 1 year stage 3 breast development). Onset of menses 
later, and menarche follows in an average of 1 year. (menarche) is a relatively late pubertal event at which 
In males, pubertal development usually commences point pubertal breast development is virtually com-
between the ages of 11 and 12, takes approximately plete. In males, any tendency to gynaecomastia should 
3 years to complete and has a characteristic sequence be noted (Fig. 18.10). This may range from minor 
of adrenarche (onset of adrenal androgen secretion degrees of subareolar glandular enlargement to 
with appearance of secondary sexual hair), testicular substantial breast prominence; breast enlargement 
development, beginning of pubic hair, beginning of associated with generalized adiposity should not be 
growth spurt and peak height velocity. confused with true gynaecomastia.

The breasts should be examined for mass lesions Genital examination in the male should document 
and, if suggested by the history, for galactorrhoea. In testicular volume. This is particularly important in 



SECTION Three
389

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

A

Figure 18.9  A large multinodular goitre. Note the asymmetrical 
growth of the nodules. 

B

Figure 18.11  Prader orchidometer. (A) Testicular volume (in ml) 
may be estimated by comparison with calibrated ellipsoids.  

Figure 18.10  Gynaecomastia. There is enlargement of both (B) Gently grip the testis in one hand and compare its volume 
breasts in this man. (including the scrotal skin, but excluding the epididymis) with that 

of the ellipsoids. The patient shown has a reduced testicular 
volume of 8 ml, due to Klinefelter’s syndrome; the normal 
secondary sexual hair is due to the provision of exogenous 

the assessment of pubertal development, for which testosterone. 
volume should be measured by comparison with 
calibrated ovoids (Prader orchidometer; Fig. 18.11). 
Prepubertal testicular volume is less than 4 ml; 
increased volume implies pubertal gonadotrophin of testosterone or dihydrotestosterone deficiency or 
stimulation. Onset of the pubertal growth spurt in resistance in the male; these conditions are rare and 
boys is associated with a testicular volume of 10 ml require specialized investigation.
and normal adult testicular volume is in the range 
of 15 to 25 ml. In the assessment of normal puberty, 
it is important to establish that growth velocity and The eyes
gonadal changes (testicular volume or breast stage) The hypercalcaemic patient should be carefully 
are concordant, since a discordance of puberty examined for corneal calcification, evident as a 
proceeding ahead of growth implies an abnormal narrow band on the medial or lateral border of 
source of sex steroid (e.g. androgen-secreting tumours the cornea (Fig. 18.12); this usually indicates long-
or congenital adrenal hyperplasia). Testicular atrophy standing hypercalcaemia and a diagnosis of primary 
in the adult male indicates hypogonadism, due to hyperparathyroidism.
primary testicular failure, hypothalamopituitary In patients with thyroid disease, the presence of 
dysfunction or chronic liver disease. Tumours of Leydig exophthalmos (proptosis) should be noted. This may 
cells are usually palpable and should be sought in be unilateral or bilateral and may be associated with 
any patient with gynaecomastia. apparent ophthalmoplegia due to tethering of the 

Examination of the external genitalia in the female is extraocular muscles, particularly the medial and 
important when androgen hypersecretion is suspected. inferior rectus muscles, such that diplopia occurs on 
Enlargement of the clitoris is a feature of excess upward or lateral gaze (dysthyroid eye disease; Fig. 
androgen secretion. 18.13). These ocular signs are especially important 

Ambiguity of the external genitalia is indicative of in the diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid disease 
fetal androgen excess in the karyotypic female and (Graves’ disease). It must be remembered that 



390 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
compression in severe dysthyroid eye disease or of 
asymmetrical pressure on the optic chiasm due to 
hypothalamopituitary space-occupying lesions. In the 
latter, assessment of the visual fields may reveal a 
bitemporal hemianopia; this is frequently incomplete 
and incongruous, reflecting the asymmetrical growth 
of the tumour. A detailed description of the visual 
pathways and examination of the visual fields is given 
in Chapter 16. In the context of suspected pituitary/
peripituitary disease, use of a red object (e.g. a hat 
pin) is preferable to finger movements as this provides 
a more sensitive marker of early visual pathway 
compression. Examination of the optic discs with the 
ophthalmoscope may show papilloedema, indicating 
recent onset of optic nerve compression, or pallor, 

Figure 18.12  Corneal calcification (band keratopathy) in a indicating neural atrophy resulting from long-standing 
patient with long-standing hyperparathyroidism. pressure. In the context of a pituitary mass lesion, 

pallor of the optic discs suggests that full visual 
recovery is improbable.

The nervous system
In thyrotoxicosis, examination of the nervous system 
reveals a rapid fine tremor. Proximal weakness with 
or without wasting of the shoulder and hip girdle 
musculature (proximal myopathy) is a typical feature 
of thyrotoxicosis, glucocorticoid excess and vitamin 
D deficiency. Osteomalacic myopathy is often associ-
ated with myalgia.

Hypocalcaemia is associated with increased neural 
excitability, which may be demonstrated by gentle 
percussion over the proximal part of the facial nerve 
(as it exits from the parotid gland). The test is positive 
if this manoeuvre evokes involuntary facial muscular 
twitching (Chvostek’s sign).

Tendon reflexes will be abnormally brisk in thyro-
toxic patients and may show a slow relaxation phase 
in hypothyroidism. Both hypothyroidism and acro-
megaly may give rise to nerve entrapment syndromes, 
particularly of the median nerve at the wrist (carpal 
tunnel syndrome).

Figure 18.13  Lid retraction and proptosis in a patient with 
thyrotoxic Graves’ disease. In this patient, there had been a Investigation
6-month history of effortless weight loss, tremulousness, shortness 
of breath on exertion and palpitations. The investigation of endocrine and metabolic disorders 

usually involves (a) the measurement of electrolytes, 
minerals, metabolites or hormones in plasma and (b) 

unilateral proptosis may also occur with an orbital isotopic, ultrasonographic, radiological or magnetic 
tumour. Lid retraction, evident as a wide-eyed staring resonance (MR) imaging of specific endocrine glands. 
expression, and lid lag, in which depression of the In investigating endocrine disease, one is usually 
upper lid lags behind the eye in a downward gaze, interested in whether a specific gland is overactive 
are due to increased activity of the sympathetic or underactive. These questions may be answered by 
innervation of levator palpebri superioris and are not basal hormone measurements, for example serum 
specific to Graves’ disease. Any degree of corneal free thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone in 
exposure due to failure of complete lid apposition thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism, but in many 
should be documented. instances the lack of a clear distinction between 

Visual acuity should be measured both with and basal hyposecretion, normal secretion and hyper-
without a pinhole to correct for any refractive error. secretion necessitates the use of stimulation and 
Reduced acuity may be a feature of optic nerve suppression tests.



SECTION Three
391

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Endocrine stimulation tests Computed tomography (CT) imaging is useful in 
assessing the pituitary, adrenal glands (Fig. 18.15) 

Endocrine stimulation tests are designed to demon- and thorax. However, MR imaging of the pituitary 
strate how much hormone a gland can secrete in (Fig. 18.16) offers definite advantages over CT in 
response to a near-maximal stimulus. Examples include terms of improved precision in detecting small 
the following: intrasellar tumours and better definition of the lateral 
■	 Insulin tolerance testing, in which carefully border of the pituitary and the cavernous sinus.

controlled insulin-induced hypoglycaemia Isotopic imaging is particularly useful for demon-
stimulates hypothalamopituitary secretion strating autonomous function within endocrine 
measured by serum growth hormone, cortisol tumours. This technique is applicable to the thyroid 
and prolactin gland (radiolabelled pertechnetate; Fig. 18.17), the 

■	 Tetracosactrin testing, in which an injection of a adrenal medulla (radiolabelled metaiodobenzylguani-
synthetic ACTH analogue is used to assess dine) and parathyroids (combined radiolabelled sesta 
adrenocortical reserve methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile (MIBI) and pertechnetate 

■	 Oral glucose tolerance test, which is an indirect differential scanning).
test of insulin secretion and action as determined 
by the rise and subsequent fall in the plasma 
glucose level following an oral glucose load

Endocrine suppression tests
Endocrine suppression tests indicate whether a 
physiological feedback mechanism is intact or if 
secretion of the hormone in question has become at 
least partly autonomous. For example, the suppression 
of plasma cortisol by the synthetic glucocorticoid 
dexamethasone is incomplete in Cushing’s syndrome, 
and suppression of serum growth hormone by an 
oral glucose load fails to occur in acromegaly.

Endocrine imaging
Plain X-ray imaging is of limited value in the investiga-
tion of endocrine disorders. However, lateral and 
anteroposterior views of the pituitary fossa can be Figure 18.15  Axial CT scan of the abdomen in a patient with a 
useful in demonstrating abnormal calcification in the right adrenal medullary phaeochromocytoma. Note the extensive 
fossa or gross expansion and erosion of the fossa due tumour mass, with areas of hypodensity indicating episodes of 

partial tumour infarction. 
to large intrasellar or suprasellar tumours. Plain 
abdominal radiology may show renal calcification 
(nephrocalcinosis; Fig. 18.14) in patients with long-
standing hypercalcaemia or renal tubular acidosis.

Figure 18.14  Widespread renal calcification typical of Figure 18.16  Magnetic resonance imaging (sagittal view) of  
nephrocalcinosis in a patient with long-standing the pituitary, demonstrating a large pituitary adenoma with 
hyperparathyroidism. suprasellar extension. 



392 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
cosuria itself (glucose in the urine) is not a reliable 
diagnostic test for diabetes mellitus.

Presenting symptoms of diabetes
Many people with type 2 diabetes may be asympto-
matic at diagnosis, for example by routine screening 
of blood or urine, when there may be only mildly 
increased levels of hyperglycaemia. Once diagnosed, 
however, many patients do admit to some long-
standing, often mild symptoms. Acute metabolic 
decompensation, leading to marked hyperglycaemia, 
occurs infrequently.

In contrast, type 1 diabetes is often abrupt in onset, 
and characterized by severe hyperglycaemia with 
acute life-threatening decompensation (diabetic 
ketoacidosis).

Figure 18.17  Technetium-labelled isotope scan of the thyroid in The cardinal symptoms of diabetes mellitus are 
a patient with a focal thyroid nodule. Note the focal area of uptake unintentional (effortless) weight loss, polyuria and 
corresponding to the palpable lesion, with surrounding inactivity polydipsia, and their presence should always result 
indicating autonomous function within the nodule. in an immediate test for blood glucose and urine for 

ketones.

Polyuria, polydipsia and nocturia
Acute hyperglycaemia causes increased urine excretion 

Diabetes mellitus (polyuria) and, as a result, excessive thirst and water 
ingestion (polydipsia). These presenting symptoms 

Diabetes is a Greek word meaning ‘a passer through; of diabetes mellitus are also termed osmotic symptoms. 
a siphon’, and mellitus derives from the Greek word Raised plasma glucose leads to increased renal tubular 
for ‘sweet’. The Greeks named it thus due to the delivery of glucose, which then exceeds the resorptive 
excessive amounts of urine produced by sufferers capacity of the renal tubule, leading to glycosuria. 
which attracted insects because of its glucose content. Therefore, despite hyperglycaemia, people with an 
The ancient Chinese tested for diabetes by observing increased renal threshold for glucose may have no 
whether ants were attracted to a person’s urine. osmotic symptoms. Conversely, people with a low 

Diabetes mellitus is the most common metabolic renal threshold for glucose may have glycosuria despite 
disorder encountered in clinical practice. It is strongly being normoglycaemic. It is for this reason that 
linked to obesity. Diabetes mellitus is characterized glycosuria is an unreliable feature in the diagnosis of 
by abnormal carbohydrate and lipid homoeostasis, diabetes mellitus. Nocturia is also common in patients 
leading to elevation in plasma glucose, or hyper- presenting with osmotic symptoms of diabetes, and 
glycaemia, and abnormality of serum lipids, or dys- enquiry regarding the frequency of passing urine at 
lipidaemia. Glucose homoeostasis is modulated mainly night can be helpful in evaluating symptoms.
by the release of insulin from the islet cells (β cells) 
of the pancreas. Diabetes develops as a result of a Weight loss and lethargy
variable combination of absolute insulin deficiency 
as a result of pancreatic islet cell dysfunction and Loss of more than 5% of total body weight should 
tissue insulin resistance due to reduced cellular be considered clinically important in a subject not 
responsiveness to insulin. deliberately attempting to lose weight. Weight loss 

The World Health Organization (WHO) has is a common presenting symptom in people with 
developed a classification of diabetes mellitus based type 1 diabetes and occasionally in type 2 diabetes 
on its pathogenesis (Box 18.8). Type 1 is characterized with marked hyperglycaemia. Loss of weight in 
by absolute insulin deficiency due to autoimmune- diabetes is predominantly due to renal glucose loss 
mediated pancreatic islet cell destruction. In contrast, as a result of lack of insulin to enable cellular uptake 
type 2 diabetes is associated with a variable degree of glucose. The weight loss usually occurs despite a 
of tissue insulin resistance, leading – at least in the normal appetite and dietary intake. This is in contrast 
early stages – to high plasma insulin levels then to the weight loss of malignant disease, which is 
subsequently to relative insulin deficiency as pancreatic usually associated with reduced appetite and oral 
islet cell function fails to overcome this resistance. intake.
The diagnostic criteria for disorders of glucose Lethargy and fatigue are also common presenting 
metabolism are shown in Box 18.9. Note that gly- symptoms of diabetes mellitus, particularly type 2, 



SECTION Three
393

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Box 18.8  The World Health Organization classification of diabetes mellitus

Type Common subtypes/pathogenesis Treatment
Type 1 Destruction of pancreatic islet cells leading to Insulin

insulin deficiency
Type 2 Ranges from predominantly insulin resistance with Diet/oral hypoglycaemic 

relative insulin deficiency (often associated with agents/insulin
obesity) to predominantly insulin deficiency

Other types
Genetic defects of β-cell Diabetes associated with glucokinase, hepatic Tablets or insulin, 
function nuclear factor (HNF) 1α, HNF1β, HNF4α, Neurod1 depending upon genetic 

and insulin promotor factor mutations (all previously defect
grouped under maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY))
Mitochondrial diabetes

Genetic defects of insulin action Insulin-resistance syndromes (type A insulin Insulin-sensitizing agents 
resistance, leprechaunism, Rabson-Mendenhall and insulin
syndrome lipoatrophic diabetes)

Diseases of the exocrine Fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes, pancreatitis, Frequently insulin required
pancreas trauma/pancreatectomy, neoplasia, cystic fibrosis, 

haemochromatosis, others
Endocrinopathies Cushing’s syndrome, acromegaly, Treatment of underlying 

phaeochromocytoma, glucagonoma, hyperthyroidism, cause
somatostatinoma, others

Drug- or chemical-induced Glucocorticoids, α-adrenergic agonists, β-adrenergic Avoid
agonists, thiazides, interferon-α therapy

Uncommon forms of immune- Insulin autoimmune syndrome (antibodies to insulin), Variable
mediated diabetes anti-insulin receptor antibodies, ‘stiff man’ syndrome
Other genetic syndromes Down’s, Friedreich’s ataxia, Huntington’s chorea, Variable
associated with diabetes Klinefelter’s, Lawrence-Moon-Biedl, myotonic 

dystrophy, porphyria, Prader-Willi, Turner’s, 
Wolfram’s

Gestational diabetes Diet/insulin

Box 18.9  World Health Organization Criteria for diagnosis of diabetes mellitus

Fasting plasma 2-hour plasma Random plasma Glycated haemoglobin 
glucose (mmol/l) glucose (mmol/l) glucose (mmol/l) (mmol/mol [%])

Diabetes mellitus ≥7.0 or ≥11.1 ≥11.1 >48 [6.5] (if asymptomtic 
should be repeated)

Impaired glucose <7.0 and Between 7.8 and – 42-47 [6.1-6.4] – pre-
tolerance (IGT) 11.0 diabetes
Impaired fasting Between 6.1 and and <7.8 –
glucose (IFG) 6.9

where the symptoms may have been present for are often recurrent, may occur. Severe infection itself 
some time. can lead to hyperglycaemia, and a new diagnosis of 

diabetes should be reconsidered once the acute 
Skin problems infection has cleared.

Oral and genital candidiasis can also be presenting 
Dermatological manifestations of diabetes are common features of diabetes mellitus. The presence of the 
at diagnosis, especially in patients with poor glycaemic characteristic white plaques on the tongue and 
control. Skin infections, such as staphylococcal infec- oropharynx in a previously healthy person not on 
tion leading to boils, carbuncles or abscesses, which antibiotic therapy should alert the physician to the 



394 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
possibility of diabetes mellitus, although other condi- activity may improve glycaemia and weight. At least 
tions leading to immune paresis, such as HIV infection 30 minutes of moderate exercise per day, for example 
or haematological malignancy, can also lead to candidi- brisk walking, is recommended.
asis. Genital candidiasis in women leads to a thick 
white discharge and vaginal soreness. Similarly, in Assessment of other cardiovascular risk factors
men it can lead to a severe balanitis (inflammation Cardiovascular risk is greatly increased in people with 
of the glans penis). Always check the blood glucose diabetes, and additional cardiovascular risk factors 
in people with recurrent candidiasis. multiply the risk. Thus, any history of hypertension, 

hyperlipidaemia or previous vascular disease (cerebro-, 
Visual disturbance cardio- or peripheral vascular) should be noted. Take 
Hyperglycaemia can lead to blurred vision, owing to a full medication history, including the use of anti-
osmotic changes within the aqueous humour of the platelet, antihypertensive and lipid-lowering drugs.
lens of the eye. This can also occur when chronic 
hyperglycaemia is treated, causing further osmotic Home glucose testing
shifts in the lens. The symptom usually settles once In a patient previously diagnosed with diabetes, assess 
normoglycaemia is achieved. his self-monitoring of glucose. This will enable a 

reasonable judgement of glycaemic control. Self-
Other important aspects of a  monitoring can be done by home capillary blood 

diabetic history testing or by urine testing for glycosuria.

Family history Insulin injections
In patients taking insulin, it is important to ascertain 

A history of diabetes in first-degree relatives is a whether the patient self-injects, the delivery device 
potent risk factor for diabetes. Type 2 diabetes appears used (disposable pen, cartridge pen or syringe/vial), 
to have a stronger genetic component than type 1, the sites chosen and whether they experience any 
with around a third of patients having a positive problems.
family history compared to around 10% of type 1 
diabetic patients.

A family history of premature cardiovascular disease Symptoms of complications of diabetes
is also important. Patients with diabetes are at risk 
of cardiovascular disease, and this risk is increased Chronic complications of diabetes mellitus can be 
when there is a family history of vascular disease in usefully subdivided into large blood vessels (macro-
fathers or brothers aged less than 55 years, or mothers vascular), small blood vessels (microvascular) and 
or sisters aged less than 65. others (Box 18.10).

Diet and lifestyle history Symptoms of macrovascular disease
The cornerstone of management of diabetes is lifestyle; The features of ischaemic heart disease are described 
accordingly, periodic reassessment is important. elsewhere (see Ch. 13). People with diabetes have 
Regularity of meals, the quality and quantity of foods fewer, less severe symptomatic chest pains, possibly 
eaten and the frequency of snacks should be known. due to autonomic neuropathy leading to reduced 
Enquire about the following: deep pain sensation – so-called ‘silent ischaemia’. 
■	 Regularity of meals – three meals a day is ideal. Thus, the only symptom of ischaemic heart disease 
■	 Content of fatty/greasy foods – particularly in a diabetic subject may be breathlessness.

discourage saturated (animal) fats, as this type Peripheral vascular disease presents with claudica-
of fat is linked to heart disease. tion. In addition, in patients with diabetes, a combina-

■	 Content of fruit and vegetables – at least five tion of peripheral neuropathy and peripheral vascular 
portions a day are recommended. disease can lead to foot ulceration, particularly at 

■	 Content of sugar and sugary foods – avoid sites of pressure (Fig. 18.18).
carbonated drinks, cakes, sweets and biscuits. Cerebrovascular disease in diabetic patients can 

■	 Content of salt – a high salt intake can lead to present with any stroke syndrome (Ch. 16). Transient 
hypertension. ischaemic attacks are common.

■	 Alcohol intake – a maximum of two units of 
alcohol per day for a woman and three units Symptoms of microvascular disease
per day for a man.

The smoking history is of paramount importance, Diabetic retinopathy is frequently asymptomatic until 
as smoking with diabetes is strongly linked to cardio- it causes significant visual loss, which may be acute 
vascular disease. Occupational history may be in onset (e.g. because of a sudden retinal haemorrhage) 
important, because if insulin therapy is required, this or insidious (e.g. because of cataract or maculopathy). 
may have an impact on legal requirements for driving. Diabetic nephropathy is similarly asymptomatic until 
Assess physical activity to ascertain whether increased renal dysfunction becomes so severe that uraemia 



SECTION Three
395

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Box 18.10  Chronic complications of diabetes

Macrovascular Coronary heart 
disease
Peripheral 
vascular disease
Cerebrovascular 
disease

Microvascular Retinopathy Non-proliferative 
(mild, moderate 
and severe)
Proliferative
Maculopathy

Figure 18.18  Diabetic neuropathic ulcer in a patient with 
Neuropathy Peripheral sensory Charcot neuroarthropathy. 

neuropathy
Autonomic 
neuropathy feature of selective involvement of small pain fibres. 
Mononeuropathy Typically the symptoms start distally and spread up 
Proximal motor in a stocking distribution and are characteristically 
neuropathy worse at night, frequently leading to insomnia.

Nephropathy Proximal motor neuropathy (diabetic amyotrophy 
Other Dermatological Diabetic or femoral neuropathy) is uncommon but is seen 

dermopathy predominantly in middle-aged men with type 2 
Necrobiosis diabetes. The condition is characterized by severe, 
lipoidica deep pain and paraesthesiae in the upper anterior 
diabeticorum thigh, followed by weakness and wasting of the 
Bullosis quadriceps muscle. The condition is often unilateral, 
diabeticorum generally short-lived (around 3 months) and usually 
Granuloma resolves spontaneously. Associated weight loss and 
annulare cachexia are common.
Acanthosis Mononeuropathies, particularly affecting the median 
nigricans nerve of the hand (carpal tunnel syndrome; see Ch. 

Rheumatological Diabetic 16), are common in patients with diabetes. This 
cheiroarthropathy frequently presents with paraesthesiae and numbness 
Flexor tendinopathy in the median nerve distribution of the hand (lateral 
Adhesive capsulitis two-and-half digits) and is again worse at night. 
Diabetic Similar symptoms may occur in the foot (tarsal tunnel 
osteoarthropathy syndrome). Cranial mononeuropathies are rare, but 
Charcot palsies of cranial nerves III, VI and VII are seen in 
neuroarthropathy patients with diabetes, leading to blurred or double 
Diffuse idiopathic vision due to ophthalmoplegia or a lower motor 
skeletal neuron facial palsy (Ch. 16). The pupillomotor fibres 
hyperostosis are usually spared in diabetic third-nerve palsy.

Hepatic Non-alcoholic Diabetes can cause autonomic neuropathy, the 
steatohepatitis symptoms of which can be very troublesome. They 

include impotence, gustatory sweating (severe facial 
sweating on tasting food), urinary retention or 
incontinence, dizziness or syncope due to postural 

ensues (see Ch. 17). Uraemic symptoms include hypotension, constipation or diarrhoea (so-called 
fatigue, breathlessness and tachypnoea, pleuritic chest diabetic diarrhoea) and recurrent nausea and vomiting 
pain due to pericarditis and pruritus. Heavy proteinuria due to diabetic gastroparesis.
may lead to the development of a nephrotic 
syndrome.

In contrast, diabetic neuropathy can manifest in a Hypoglycaemia
number of ways. Chronic peripheral sensory neu-
ropathy is the commonest form, affecting around 5% Treatment of diabetes is aimed at reducing symptoms 
of patients with diabetes. This can present with and reducing the risk of diabetic complications. In 
symptoms varying from numbness, a feeling of ‘walking attempting to reduce hyperglycaemia using oral 
on cotton wool’ and paraesthesiae (pins and needles) hypoglycaemic tablets or insulin therapy, the patient 
to burning, sharp and shooting pains. The latter is a with diabetes is at risk of hypoglycaemia.



396 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
Physiological responses to hypoglycaemia start at Box 18.11  The diabetic annual review

a plasma glucose of around 3.8 mmol/l, with the 
release of counter-regulatory hormones such as History
glucagon or adrenaline (epinephrine). Symptoms of ■	 Patient concerns
hypoglycaemia normally occur at around this level ■	 Events – life and medical
because of sympathetic overactivation. Such symptoms ■	 Glucose diary (urine or blood)
include sweating, palpitations, hunger, agitation or ■	 Current treatment
blurred vision, and most patients recognize them as ■	 Hypoglycaemia
hypoglycaemia and are able to treat themselves rapidly. ■	 Driving
A further drop in plasma glucose leads to neurogly- ■	 Pregnancy/contraception in women
copenic symptoms, in which cerebral glucose is low, ■	 Impotence
leading to impaired intellectual activity or diminished ■	 Symptoms of coronary heart disease or peripheral 
psychomotor skills. Further drops in glucose levels vascular disease
can lead to severe agitation, confusion, coma and ■	 Smoking habit
epileptiform seizures. The symptoms of hypoglycaemia Examination
can be distressing and have a significant adverse 

■
impact on quality of life. Loss of awareness of hypo- 	 Weight/Body Mass Index

■
glycaemia is sometimes a problem in diabetic patients 	 Blood pressure – erect and supine

■
with autonomic neuropathy, and in insulin-treated 	 Injection sites

■
diabetes this can lead to unexpected hypoglycaemia. 	 Urinalysis

■
Patients at risk should be warned against driving 	 Eye examination

■
motor vehicles and taught the early symptoms of 	 Foot examination

hypoglycaemia in order to raise their awareness of Tests
this potentially serious complication of therapy. ■	 Renal function, liver function

■	 Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c)
■

Examination of the diabetic patient 	 Lipids
■	 Urine for albumin excretion

General assessment
Patients with diabetes can present with acute meta-
bolic decompensation, leading to diabetic ketoacidosis the skin of the feet (tinea pedis). Staphylococcal skin 
(DKA), hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic syndrome infections leading to pustules, abscesses or carbuncles 
(HHS) or, in treated patients, hypoglycaemia. Thus, can also be seen. Other skins lesions seen in diabetes 
it is mandatory for all patients presenting with coma include necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (Fig. 18.19). 
or reduced conscious level to have their blood glucose This is a rare complication of diabetes, predominantly 
checked immediately. seen in young women aged 15-40 years. This presents 

Characteristically, the cardinal symptoms of severe as a painless red macule, usually over the anterior 
polyuria, polydipsia and weight loss will have been shin, which then heals with scarring to form a 
present for some time prior to coma; such symptoms yellowish/brown lesion. The condition can be unsightly, 
should never be ignored in a diabetic person. Patients and little effective treatment is available. Vitiligo is 
with acute hyperglycaemic crises are frequently seen in a small number of patients with type 1 
severely dehydrated, with hypotension (including diabetes, reflecting its autoimmune nature.
postural hypotension), tachycardia, dry mucous Diabetic dermopathy is characterized by brown 
membranes and reduced skin turgor. Other signs of macules on the lower legs that heal to form atrophic, 
DKA include rapid deep sighing respiration (Kussmaul shiny white scars. A further skin lesion seen in patients 
breathing – a respiratory compensation for metabolic with diabetes is granuloma annulare, pale, shiny rings 
acidosis) and ketones on the breath (a sweet odour and nodules usually seen on the hands (Fig. 18.20). 
reminiscent of nail polish remover). Diabetic ketoaci- Bullosis diabeticorum is a rare manifestation, char-
dosis can occasionally present with symptoms of an acterized by tense blistering, mainly on the feet. 
acute abdomen. Acanthosis nigricans is characterized by a dark velvety 

In the non-acute setting, it is desirable for all patients appearance in the axillae or neck of people with 
with diabetes to undergo a full medical assessment insulin resistance (Fig. 18.21) and frequently accom-
once a year – the so-called diabetic annual review panies type 2 diabetes but may occur in people with 
(Box 18.11). insulin resistance in the absence of diabetes.

Diabetic patients treated with insulin should have 
Skin, nails and hands their injection sites examined for signs of lipohyper-

trophy (a physiological response to insulin injected 
Dermatological manifestations of diabetes are near fat cells) (Fig. 18.22) or lipoatrophy (an allergic 
common. Fungal nail infections, particularly of the response to non-human insulins – now rarely seen) 
feet, are common, as are dermatophyte infections of (Fig. 18.23).



SECTION Three
397

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Figure 18.22   Lipohypertrophy. (Courtesy of Dr David Peterson.)

Figure 18.19  Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum. 

Figure 18.23  Lipoatrophy. (Courtesy of Dr David Peterson.)

Diabetic cheiroarthropathy, or ‘stiff hand syndrome’ 
or ‘limited joint mobility’, is seen in some patients 
with long-standing diabetes. It is characterized by 

Figure 18.20  Granuloma annulare. (Courtesy of Dr David skin thickening and sclerosis of the tendon sheaths, 
Peterson.) leading to reduced joint mobility and the characteristic 

prayer sign (Fig. 18.24). Examination of the hands 
for signs of carpal tunnel syndrome (Ch. 16) is 
important if the patient has suggestive symptoms. 
Thus, the presence of Tinel’s sign (Fig. 18.25) and 
Phalen’s sign (Fig. 18.26) should be sought. Thenar 
eminence wasting may also be seen.

Eyes
Examination of the eyes is mandatory in patients with 
diabetes. External examination may indicate signs of 
dyslipidaemia (corneal arcus and xanthelasmata; Fig. 
18.27). A reduced pupillary response to light may indi-
cate autonomic neuropathy. Visual acuity should be 
assessed yearly with a Snellen chart, and unexplained 
loss of acuity should be investigated. Funduscopy 

Figure 18.21  Acanthosis nigricans. should be undertaken with pharmacological dilatation 



398 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Figure 18.27  Corneal arcus and xanthelasmata in a patient with 
diabetic dyslipidaemia. 

Figure 18.24  The prayer sign in diabetic cheiroarthropathy. 

Figure 18.28  Diabetic cataract. 

Figure 18.25  Tinel’s sign in carpal tunnel syndrome: tapping on 
the median nerve at the wrist induces pain in the median nerve 
distribution. of the pupils in order to obtain an adequate view. 

Loss of the red reflex on fundoscopy may indicate 
cataract formation, and the lens should be assessed for 
opacities (Fig. 18.28). The vitreous and retina should 
be examined carefully, starting from the optic disc and 
radiating into each quadrant of the eye. The macula 
is examined last, as this can be quite uncomfortable 
for the patient. The use of green light may aid the 
detection of microaneurysms. Ideally, all patients with 
diabetes should have annual fundal photography. A 
classification of diabetic retinopathy is shown in Box 
18.12 (and see Figs 18.29-18.33).

Cardiovascular system
Examination of the heart and vasculature is important 
in patients with diabetes. Palpation of peripheral 
pulses, especially of the feet, is extremely important, 
as is auscultation of the carotid and femoral arteries 

Figure 18.26  Phalen’s sign in carpal tunnel syndrome: to detect bruits. Blood pressure should be measured 
hyperflexion of the wrist leads to pain in the median nerve frequently in patients with diabetes to detect hyper-
distribution. tension (classed at >140/80 mmHg in patients with 



SECTION Three
399

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

Box 18.12  Characteristic features of diabetic retinopathy
Non-proliferative retinopathy
■	 Microaneurysms
■	 Dot haemorrhages
■	 Hard exudates (lipid deposits) not involving the macula
Mild
■	 <5 microaneurysms
■	 Haemorrhages and/or exudates
Moderate
■	 Extensive (>5) blot haemorrhages and/or 

microaneurysms and/or cotton wool spots (retinal 
ischaemia)

■	 Venous beading
■	 Looping or reduplication Figure 18.30  Preproliferative changes with multiple dot and  
■	 Intraretinal microvascular anomaly (IRMA) blot haemorrhages and cotton wool spots. (Courtesy of Dr Paul 
Severe Dodson.)
■	 Intraretinal deep blocked haemorrhages in four 

quadrants
■	 Venous beading in two quadrants
■	 Severe IRMA in one quadrant
Proliferative retinopathy
■	 New vessels on disc (NVD) or elsewhere (NVE)
Maculopathy
■	 Any retinopathy 1 disc diameter around the macula
■	 Focal or exudative maculopathy
■	 Diffuse
■	 Ischaemic

Figure 18.31  Retinal haemorrhage due to new vessel formation 
in severe proliferative retinopathy. (Courtesy of Dr Paul Dodson.)

Figure 18.29  Background retinopathy (dot haemorrhages and 
microaneurysms) in the inferior nasal region. (Courtesy of Dr Paul Figure 18.32  New vessel formation and laser photocoagulation 
Dodson.) burns in severe proliferative retinopathy. (Courtesy of Dr Paul 

Dodson.)

diabetes) or postural hypotension (drop in systolic 
BP >20 mmHg on standing). A resting tachycardia, Feet
loss of sinus arrhythmia (reflex bradycardia on The feet of patients with diabetes should be examined 
expiration) and loss of reflex bradycardia during a at least once a year. Signs of deformity, callus (a sign 
Valsalva manoeuvre can indicate autonomic neuropa- of excessive pressure at this site), fungal infection 
thy, although these are best assessed by electrocar- especially between the toes, nail care and ulceration 
diography (ECG). should be carefully assessed. Peripheral pulses and 



400 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
should be classified as at high risk for ulceration and 
be given careful education on foot care by a podiatrist.

Investigation
Diagnosis of diabetes is based on a fasting plasma 
glucose, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) or 
Glycated Haemoglobin (HbA1c) using the WHO 
criteria (see Box 18.9). Although clinically it is rela-
tively simple to distinguish between type 1 and type 
2 diabetes, occasionally the diagnosis is not clear, 
especially in younger-onset type 2 diabetes without 
a family history. In these circumstances, the use of 
immunological tests such as anti-islet cell (ICA) or 

Figure 18.33  Exudative diabetic maculopathy. (Courtesy of Dr antiglutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) antibody 
Paul Dodson.) may be helpful. Positivity of either is a good indicator 

of autoimmune islet cell destruction (and hence 
probable type 1 diabetes), insulin deficiency and a 
subsequent requirement for insulin therapy.

In acute hyperglycaemic decompensation of dia-
betes, urgent investigations are required, including a 
laboratory glucose estimation, assessment of renal 
function (urea and electrolytes), urinalysis testing for 
ketones and glucose, and arterial blood gas assessment 
to determine pH and bicarbonate level. A search for 
precipitating causes should be undertaken, including 
a chest radiograph, ECG, white cell count and, in 
younger women, a pregnancy test.

In order to reduce the risk of chronic complications, 
it is important to ensure a full biochemical assessment 
is undertaken yearly as part of an annual diabetic 
review. Renal and liver function should be checked, 
along with assessment of urine albumin excretion. 

Figure 18.34  Testing for neuropathy using a Semmes Weinstein Glycaemic control can be assessed using the HbA1c, 
monofilament giving standard 10 g of fine touch. which is well correlated to prevailing glycaemic control 

over the preceding 10-12 weeks. Glycaemic targets 
are individualized according to the patient’s age, 

nail-fold refill should be assessed for signs of peripheral comorbidities, risk of hypoglycaemia and his own 
vascular disease. Nerve function should be assessed preferences. An HbA1c less than 53 mmol/mol (7.0%) 
by testing vibration sense at the great toe, medial is generally deemed to show acceptable glycaemic 
malleolus and knee, and testing fine touch on the control. Lipid profile (cholesterol, triglycerides, low-
toes, metatarsal heads, heels and dorsum of the feet density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and high-density 
with a 10-g monofilament (Semmes Weinstein lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol) should be checked 
monofilament) (Fig. 18.34). Loss of ankle jerks is yearly.
also a sign of early diabetic peripheral sensory 
neuropathy.

A complication of diabetic peripheral neuropathy Lipid disorders
is the neuropathic joint – Charcot neuroarthropathy 
(see Fig. 18.18). This usually affects the ankle and The two circulating lipids, cholesterol and triglyceride, 
presents with a painless, swollen, hot red joint, are transported within lipoproteins in the circula-
sometimes with a history of minor local trauma. The tion. The apolipoproteins over the surface of these 
natural history is of progressive deformity until the molecules enable their recognition by cells in organs 
process settles, usually over a few months. Untreated, such as the liver. Lipid disorders are common and 
the joint develops severe deformity, which then puts contribute significantly to the burden of cardiovascular 
the foot at high risk of ulceration, infection and disease. Primary lipid disorders are usually inherited, 
amputation. Treatment is with immobilization in a whereas secondary disorders are acquired as a result 
plaster-cast boot and intravenous bisphosphonates. of other medical disorders, such as thyroid disease, 

Diabetic patients with signs of peripheral vascular diabetes, liver disease, nephrotic syndrome or alcohol 
disease or peripheral neuropathy, even if asymptomatic, excess.



SECTION Three
401

Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿

History Other sites include the tibial tuberosities, at the site 
of insertion of the patellar tendon (subperiosteal 

Lipid disorders rarely cause significant symptoms, xanthomata) or at the triceps tendon at the elbow.
unless the patient presents with an acute feature such As the cholesterol deposition is deep within the 
as acute pancreatitis or myocardial infarction. Thus, tendon and the swelling is fibrous, tendon xanthomata 
any previous history of vascular disease or acute are felt as hard nodules along the length of the tendon. 
abdominal pain should be sought. Acute pancreatitis They occasionally become inflamed, and a tenosyno-
is a rare complication of severe hypertriglyceridaemia vitis develops. On the extensor surface of the hands, 
and presents with acute, severe, generalized abdominal they may overlie the knuckle and be very hard and 
pain. Although alcohol and cholelithiasis are the quite easy to miss.
commonest causes of acute pancreatitis, hypertriglyc- Xanthelasmata are deposits of lipid in the skin of 
eridaemia is a well-recognized and easily overlooked the eyelids, more commonly the upper rather than the 
cause of the condition, and any patient presenting lower (see Fig. 18.27). Although a dramatic sign, they 
with acute pancreatitis should have his serum lipids are not present in the majority of patients with familial 
checked. hypercholesterolaemia. More common is a corneal 

In the assessment of patients with lipid disorders, arcus, seen as a rim of lipid deposit around the iris 
it is important to enquire about symptoms of ischae- (Fig. 18.27). This can be seen at any age, although it 
mic heart disease (chest pain history, admissions for is more common in older people; only in the minority 
ischaemic heart disease and any cardiological/ is this sign associated with hypercholesterolaemia.
cardiothoracic interventions), peripheral vascular The characteristic sign of hypertriglyceridaemia is 
disease (intermittent claudication) and cerebrovascular eruptive xanthomata (Fig. 18.36). These are yellow 
disease (transient ischaemic attacks, amaurosis fugax nodules or papules that usually appear on the extensor 
and strokes). Other cardiovascular risk factors should surface of the elbows, knees, buttocks and back. Striate 
also be assessed. The smoking history is very important palmar xanthomas are yellowish discoloration of 
and a family history of premature vascular disease the skin creases, usually seen best in the hands, and 
(under the age of 55 years) should be carefully sought. are due to hypertriglyceridaemia. In severe forms of 
In familial hypercholesterolaemia, half of men and hypertriglyceridaemia, hepatosplenomegaly may be 
a fifth of women die before the age of 60 from coro- seen. Funduscopy in severe hypertriglyceridaemia may 
nary heart disease. Possible symptoms of secondary show lipaemia retinalis, characterized by optic pallor 
causes should also be assessed. Thus, symptoms of and the retinal vessels appearing white (Fig. 18.37).
hypothyroidism (above), diabetes (above), renal failure A careful cardiovascular examination should be 
or nephrotic syndrome (Ch. 17) and liver disease performed in all patients with significant hyperlipi-
(Ch. 14) should be sought. Alcohol intake and dietary daemia, including a search for carotid or femoral 
history should also be assessed. bruits and signs of peripheral vascular disease. Patients 

with homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia 
Examination may have signs of aortic stenosis.
The diagnostic hallmark of familial hypercholester- Investigation
olaemia is tendon xanthomata. These are localized 
infiltrates of lipid-containing macrophages that All patients with lipid disorders should undergo a 
resemble atherosclerotic plaques; they develop from fasting lipid profile, comprising total cholesterol, 
the third decade onwards. The commonest sites are LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycer-
the Achilles tendon and the extensor tendons of the ides. In severe hypertriglyceridaemia, the serum 
hands, particularly over the knuckles (Fig. 18.35). may become turbid and take on the appearance 

Figure 18.35  Tendon xanthoma of the hands. (Courtesy of Dr Figure 18.36  Eruptive xanthomata in severe 
David Peterson.) hypertriglyceridaemia. (Courtesy of Dr David Peterson.)



402 18 Endocrine and metabolic disorders ﻿
of milk. Investigations to exclude secondary causes 
should include thyroid, liver and renal function and 
fasting glucose. Resting or exercise ECG may be 
checked to look for signs of ischaemic heart disease. 
Genotyping to determine the type of familial lipid 
abnormality may be required, especially for familial 
hypercholesterolaemia, although this is usually only 
available in specialist centres.

Acute pancreatitis can be diagnosed using serum 
amylase, which is frequently very elevated in the 
condition. In severe hypertriglyceridaemia, however, 
falsely low serum amylase can lead to diagnostic 
confusion, as triglycerides interfere with the amylase 
assay. Severe hypertriglyceridaemia can lead to a pseu-
dohyponatraemia, and care should be exercised when 

Figure 18.37  Lipaemia retinalis. (Courtesy of Dr Paul Dodson.) interpreting serum sodium levels in the condition.



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Skin, nails and hair 19 
Rino Cerio

Introduction natural light), but the patient’s modesty should be 
protected. Sometimes a magnifying lens or derma-

The skin is the largest organ in the human body. toscope is useful.
Forming a major interface between man and his 
environment, it covers an area of approximately 2 m 
and weighs about 4 kg. The structure of human skin Colour and pigmentation
is complex (Figs 19.1 and 19.2), consisting of four Before inspecting any rash or lesion, note the colour 
distinct layers and tissue components with many of the skin. Normal skin colour varies, depending on 
important functions (Box 19.1). Reactions may occur lifestyle and light exposure as well as constitutional 
in any of the components of human skin and their and ethnic factors.
clinical manifestations reflect, among other factors, the Pallor can have many causes. It may be:
skin level in which they occur, and sometimes they ■	 temporary, due to shock, haemorrhage or 
act as a ‘window’ of systemic changes elsewhere in intense emotion
the body, e.g. medical conditions discussed later in the ■	 persistent, due to anaemia or peripheral 
chapter, such as those associated with pruritus (Box vasoconstriction.
19.9), systemic causes of erythema nodosum (Box Vasoconstriction is seen in patients with severe 
19.10) or paraneoplastic skin conditions (Box 19.2). atopy – an inherited susceptibility to asthma, eczema 

The accurate diagnosis of most skin lesions requires and hay fever. Pallor is a feature of anaemia, but not 
an adequate history, careful examination of the patient all pale persons are anaemic; conjunctival and mucosal 
and, occasionally, laboratory investigation, but der- colour is a better indication of anaemia than skin 
matology is predominantly a visual specialty. colour. A pale skin resulting from diminished pigment 

occurs with hypopituitarism and hypogonadism.
Normal skin contains varying amounts of brown 

History melanin pigment. Brown pigmentation due to depos-
ited haemosiderin is always pathological. Albinism is 

Detailed information should be sought concerning an inherited generalized absence of pigment in the 
the present skin condition. This should include the skin; a localized form is known as piebaldism. Patches 
site of onset, mode of spread and duration of the of white and darkly pigmented skin (vitiligo) (Fig. 
disorder. Any personal history or family history of 19.3) are due to a local and complete absence of 
skin disease, including skin cancer and atopy (an melanocytes. Several autoimmune endocrine disorders 
allergic skin reaction becoming apparent more or less are associated with vitiligo.
immediately on contact), is important. Previous Abnormal redness of the skin (erythema) is seen 
medical conditions should be noted and a full drug after overheating, extreme exertion, sunburn and in 
history obtained, including use of over-the-counter febrile, exanthematous and inflammatory skin diseases. 
and other preparations. The social and occupational Flushing is a striking redness, usually of the face and 
history and, in some circumstances, details of recent neck, which may be transient or persistent. Local 
travel, environmental exposure, especially sunshine redness may be due to telangiectasia, especially on 
and artificial ultraviolet light, and sexual activity are the face. Cyanosis is a blue or purple-blue tint due 
often important (see Box 19.3). to the presence of excessive reduced haemoglobin, 

either locally, as in impaired peripheral circula-
tion, or generally, when oxygenation of the blood 

Examination is defective. The skin colour in methaemoglobi-
naemia is more leaden than in ordinary cyanosis; 

The whole skin, including hair, nails and assessable it is caused by drugs, such as dapsone, and certain 
mucosae, should be fully inspected (preferably in poisons.



404 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Epidermis

Capillary loop

Sebaceous
gland

Dermis Hair follicle

Erector pilorum
muscle

Eccrine sweat
Subcutaneous gland

tissue
Hair matrix

Figure 19.1  The anatomy of the full thickness of the skin in section. 

Skin surface

Stratum 
corneum

Keratinocytes

Langerhans’
cell

Basal cell
layer

Melanocyte

Basement
membrane

Figure 19.3  Vitiligo, a disorder of cutaneous pigmentation  
that is often autoimmune in origin and associated with other 

Figure 19.2  The anatomy of the epidermis. autoimmune disorders. 

Jaundice varies from the subicteric lemon-yellow orange-yellow of carotenaemia, which does not. Slight 
tints seen in pernicious anaemia and acholuric jaundice degrees of jaundice cannot be seen in artificial light.
to various shades of yellow, orange or dark olive-green Increased pigmentation may be racial, due to 
in obstructive jaundice. Jaundice, which stains the sunburn or connected with various diseases. In 
conjunctivae, must be distinguished from the rare Addison’s disease, there is a brown or dark-brown 



SECTION Three
405

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.1  Functions of the human skin
■	 Protection: physical, chemical, infection – immune and 

innate
■	 Physiological: homoeostasis of electrolytes, water and 

protein
■	 Thermoregulation
■	 Sensation: specialized nerve endings – pain, touch and 

temperature
■	 Lubrication and waterproofing: sebum
■	 Immunological reactions: Langerhans’ cells, 

lymphocytes, macrophages
■	 Wound healing
■	 Ultra violet-induced vitamin D synthesis
■	 Body odour: apocrine glands
■	 Psychosocial: cosmetic Figure 19.4  Flat-topped papules of lichen planus. 

■	 Chronic arsenic poisoning, in which the skin is 
Box 19.2  Paraneoplastic skin disorders finely dappled affecting covered more than 

exposed parts
Dermatosis Associated tumour ■	 Argyria, in which the deposition of silver in the 
Dermatomyositis Lung, GI tract, GU tract skin produces a diffuse slate-grey hue
Acanthosis nigricans GI tract, lung, liver ■	 The cachexia of advanced malignant disease
Paget’s disease of the nipple/ Adenocarcinoma In pregnancy, there may be pigmentation of the 
Extra-mammary Paget’s nipples and areolae, of the linea alba and sometimes 
disease of the perineum a mask-like pigmentation of the face (chloasma). 
Erythroderma Haematological Chloasma may also be induced by oral contraceptives 
Tylosis-thickening of palms Oesophageal containing oestrogen. A similar condition, melasma, 
and soles carcinoma may be seen in Asian and Afro-Caribbean males.
Ichthyosis Lymphoma Localized pigmentation may be seen in pellagra 
Erythema gyratum repens Lung, breast and in scars of various kinds, particularly those due 

to X-irradiation therapy. Venous hypertension in the 
Necrolytic migratory erythema Glucagonoma legs is often associated with chronic purpura, leading 

to haemosiderin pigmentation. The mixture of 
punctate and fresh purpura and haemosiderin may 

Box 19.3  Approach to dermatological patient history produce a golden hue on the lower calves and shins. 
Time course of skin eruption Pigmentation may also occur with chronic infestation 

by body lice. Erythema ab igne, a reticular pattern 
Distribution of lesions including initially of pigmentation, can be seen in patients who use 
Symptoms – pruritus local heat to relieve chronic pain or on the shins of 
Family history – atopy and psoriasis people who habitually sit too near a fire. Livedo 
Drug/allergy history reticularis, a web-like pattern of reddish-blue discolora-
Past medical history tion mostly involving the legs, occurs in autoimmune 
Contacts – family and partners vasculitis, especially in systemic lupus erythematosus 
Provocating factors – sunlight and foods (SLE) and antiphospholipid syndrome, when it is 
Previous and current treatments associated with cerebral infarction. The violet-coloured 

lesions of lichen planus are slightly raised, flat-topped 
papules (Fig. 19.4). Psoriasis usually presents as a 
symmetrical plaque on extensor surfaces (Fig. 19.5). 

pigmentation affecting exposed parts and parts not Keloid consists of raised and inflamed, overgrown 
normally pigmented, such as the axillae and the tender scar tissue (Fig. 19.6).
palmar creases; the lips and mouth may exhibit dark 
bluish-black areas. Note, however, that mucosal 
pigmentation is a normal finding in a substantial Skin lesions and eruptions
proportion of black patients. Skin eruptions and lesions should be examined with 

More or less generalized pigmentation may also be special reference to their morphology, distribution 
seen in the following: and arrangement. The terminology of skin lesions is 
■	 Haemochromatosis, in which the skin has a summarized in Boxes 19.4 and 19.5. Colour, size, 

peculiar greyish-bronze colour with a metallic consistency, configuration, margination and surface 
sheen, due to excessive melanin and iron pigment characteristics should be noted.



406 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.4  Primary skin lesions: a glossary of dermatological 
terms

Macule Non-palpable area of altered colour
Papule Palpable elevated small area of skin 

(<0.5 cm)
Plaque Palpable flat-topped discoid lesion 

(>2 cm)
Nodule Solid palpable lesion within the skin 

(>0.5 cm)
Papilloma Pedunculated lesion projecting from the 

skin
Vesicle Small fluid-filled blister (<0.5 cm)
Bulla Large fluid-filled blister (>0.5 cm)
Pustule Blister containing pus
Wheal Elevated lesion, often white with red 

margin due to dermal oedema

Figure 19.5  Salmon-pink plaque of psoriasis on elbow covered Telangiectasia Dilatation of superficial blood vessel
in characteristic silver scale. Petechiae Pinhead-sized macules of blood

Purpura Larger petechiae which do not blanch on 
pressure

Ecchymosis Large extravasation of blood in skin 
(bruise)

Haematoma Swelling due to gross bleeding
Poikiloderma Atrophy, reticulate hyperpigmentation 

and telangiectasia
Erythema Redness of the skin
Burrow Linear or curved elevations of the 

superficial skin due to infestation by 
female scabies mite

Comedo Dark horny keratin and sebaceous plugs 
within pilosebaceous openings

Figure 19.6  Multiple keloid scarring of the back due to acne 
vulgaris. There is a genetic predisposition to the formation of The elasticity of the skin should be investigated. 
keloid in scar tissue. If a fold of healthy skin is pinched up, it immediately 

flattens itself out again when released. Sometimes, 
however, it only does so very slowly, remaining creased 

Morphology of skin lesions for a considerable time. This is found frequently in 
healthy old people but may be an important sign of 

Inspection and palpation dehydration, for example after severe vomiting and 
Assessment of morphology requires visual and tactile diarrhoea, or in uncontrolled diabetes mellitus.
examination. Do not be afraid to feel the lesions. You 
will rarely be exposed to any infection risk, with the Subcutaneous oedema
exception of herpes simplex, herpes zoster, syphilis, When oedema is present, firm pressure on the skin 
Hepatitis B and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) with a finger produces a shallow pit that persists for 
disease. If these infections are suspected, it is wise some time. In some cases, especially when the oedema 
to wear disposable plastic gloves when examining is very long standing, pitting is not found. The best 
open or bleeding cutaneous lesions. Begin with palpa- place to look for slight degrees of oedema in cardiac 
tion of the skin. Pass the hand gently over it, pinching disease is behind the malleoli at the ankles in patients 
it up between the forefinger and thumb, and note who are ambulant and over the sacrum in those who 
the following points: are confined to bed. The finger pressure should be 
■	 Is it smooth or rough, thin or thick? maintained for 20-30 seconds or slight degrees of 
■	 Is it dry or moist? oedema will be overlooked. Pitting is minimal or 
■	 Is there any visible sweating, either general or absent in oedema due to lymphatic obstruction, 

local? where the skin is usually thickened and tough.



SECTION Three
407

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.5  Secondary skin lesions that evolve from primary 
lesions

Scale Loose excess normal and abnormal 
horny layer

Crust Dried exudate
Excoriation A scratch
Lichenification Thickening of the epidermis with 

exaggerated skin margin
Fissure Slit in the skin
Erosion Partial loss of epidermis which heals 

without scarring
Ulcer At least the full thickness of the 

epidermis is lost. Healing occurs with 
scarring

Sinus A cavity or channel that allows the 
escape of fluid or pus Figure 19.7  Hansen’s disease. There is a depigmented area of 

Scar Healing by replacement with fibrous anaesthetic and slightly pink skin on the exposed cheek. In this 
tissue lepromatous lesion, acid-fast bacilli were found in scrapings. 

Keloid scar Excessive scar formation (see Fig. 19.6)
Atrophy Thinning of the skin due to shrinkage of 

epidermis, dermis or subcutaneous fat contact dermatitis from nickel earrings, lipstick 
Stria Atrophic pink or white linear lesion due dermatitis, etc.

to changes in connective tissue Swelling of the eyelids is an important sign. Without 
redness and scaling, bilateral periorbital oedema may 
indicate acute nephritis, nephrosis or trichinosis. If 
there is irritation, contact dermatitis is the probable 

Subcutaneous emphysema diagnosis. Dermatomyositis often produces swelling 
Air trapped under the skin gives rise to a characteristic and heliotrope-coloured erythema of the eyelids 
crackling sensation on palpation. It starts in, and is without scaling of the skin. In Hansen’s disease 
usually confined to, the neighbourhood of the air (leprosy), the skin lesions may be depigmented or 
passages. On rare occasions, it may result from the reddened, with a slightly raised edge; they are also 
clostridial infection of soft tissues after injury (gas anaesthetic to pinprick testing (Fig. 19.7) and mainly 
gangrene). located in skin that is normally cooler than core body 

temperature.
Distribution of skin lesions
Consider the distribution of an eruption by looking Configuration of skin lesions
at the whole skin surface: Once the morphology of individual lesions and their 
■	 Is it symmetrical or asymmetrical? Symmetry distribution has been established, it is useful to 

often implies an internal causation, whereas describe their configuration on the skin (Box 19.6).
asymmetry may imply external factors.

■	 Is the eruption centrifugal (radiating from the The hair
centre) or centripetal (radiating to the centre)? 
Certain common diseases such as chickenpox Hair colour and texture are racial characteristics that 
and pityriasis rosea are characteristically are genetically determined. The yellow-brown Mongol 
centripetal, whereas erythema multiforme and race has black straight hair, negroid people have black 
erythema nodosum are centrifugal. Smallpox, curly hair and Caucasians have fair, brown, red or 
now eradicated, was also centrifugal. black hair. Secondary sexual hair begins to appear at 

■	 A disease may exhibit a flexor or an extensor puberty and has characteristic male and female pat-
bias in its distribution: atopic eczema in terns. Androgenic male pattern baldness is genetically 
childhood is characteristically flexor, whereas determined but requires adequate levels of circulating 
psoriasis in adults tends to be extensor. androgens for its expression. It occurs in women only 

■	 Are only exposed areas affected, implicating in old age.
sunlight or some other external causative factor?

■	 If sunlight is suspected, are areas normally in Growth of hair
shadow involved? Unlike other epithelial mitotic activity that is continu-

■	 Are the genitalia involved? ous throughout life, the growth of hair is cyclic (Fig. 
■	 Localized distributions may point immediately 19.8), the hair follicle going through alternating 

to an external contact as the cause, for example phases of growth (anagen) and rest (telogen). Anagen 



408 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Cord of Clubbed
New anagen hair epithelial cells telogen hair

Anagen I Anagen II Anagen III Catogen Telogen

Figure 19.8  Hair follicle growth stages. 

Box 19.6  Configuration of individual lesions Box 19.7  Causes of alopecia
■	 Nummular/discoid Non-scarring
■	 Round or coin-like ■	 Alopecia areata
■	 Annular ■	 Trichotillomania (self-induced hair pulling)
■	 Ring-like ■	 Traction alopecia
■	 Circinate ■	 Scalp ringworm (human)
■	 Circular ■	 Metabolic iron deficiency, hypothyroidism)
■	 Arcuate ■	 Drugs, e.g. heparin, retinoids, chemotherapy
■	 Curved ■	 Sarcoidosis
■	 Gyrate/serpiginous Scarring
■	 Wave-like

■
■	 Linear 	 Burns, trauma

■
■	 In a line 	 Aplasia cutis

■
■	 Grouped 	 Discoid lupus erythematosus, lichen planopilaris

■
■	 Clustered 	 Dissecting folliculitis

■
■	 Reticulate 	 Pseudopelade

■
■	 Net-like 	 Kerion (see Fig. 19.30)

■	 X-irradiation
■	 Necrobiosis

in the scalp lasts 3-5 years; telogen is much shorter, In addition, the clinician should determine whether 
about 3 months. Catagen is the conversion stage from the alopecia results in scarring and hence, permanent 
active to resting and usually lasts a few days. The hair loss (Box 19.7).
duration of the anagen phase determines the length Any inflammatory or destructive disease of the 
to which hair in different body areas can grow. On scalp skin may destroy hair follicles in its wake. Thus, 
the scalp, there are on average about 100 000 hairs. burns, heavy X-ray irradiation or herpes zoster infec-
The normal scalp may shed as many as 100 hairs tion in the first division of the trigeminal nerve may 
every day as a normal consequence of growth cycling. cause scarring and alopecia. Alopecia in the presence 
These proportions can be estimated by looking at of normal scalp skin may be patchy and localized, as 
plucked hairs (trichogram); the ‘root’ of a telogen in traction alopecia in nervous children, ringworm 
hair is non-pigmented and visible as a white, club-like infections (tinea capitis) or autoimmune alopecia 
swelling. Normally 85% of scalp hairs are in anagen areata. Secondary syphilis is a rare cause of a patchy 
and 15% in telogen. alopecia with a ‘moth-eaten’ appearance.

Scalp hair loss at the temples and crown, with the 
Alopecia growth of male-type body hair, is characteristic of 
Hair loss (alopecia) has many causes. It is convenient women with virilizing disorders. Metabolic causes of 
to subdivide alopecia into localized and diffuse types. diffuse hair loss in women include hypothyroidism 



SECTION Three
409

Skin, nails and hair ﻿
and severe iron deficiency anaemia. Antimitotic drugs The nails
may affect the growing hair follicles, producing a 
diffuse loss of anagen hairs, which are pigmented The nails should be examined carefully. The structure 
throughout their length. Dramatic metabolic upsets, of the nail and nail bed is shown in Figs 19.11 and 
such as childbirth, starvation and severe toxic illnesses, 19.12. The nail consists of a strong, relatively inflexible 
may precipitate follicles into the resting phase, produc- keratinous nail plate over the dorsal surface of the 
ing an effluvium of telogen hairs 3 months later, when end of each digit, protecting the fingertip.
anagen begins again. This is called telogen alopecia. 
In the autoimmune disorder alopecia totalis (Fig. Nail matrix abnormalities
19.9), there is complete loss of hair. Self-inflicted Thimble pitting of the nails is characteristic of psoriasis 
traction alopecia (Fig. 19.10) may indicate psychologi- (Fig. 19.13), but eczema and alopecia areata may 
cal problems. also produce pitting. A severe illness may temporarily 

arrest nail growth; when growth starts again, transverse 
ridges develop. These are called Beau’s lines and can 
be used to date the time of onset of an illness. Inflam-
mation of the cuticle or nail fold (chronic paronychia) 

Proximal 
nail fold

Cuticle

Nail plate

Nail bed

Nail matrix

Figure 19.11  Structure of the nail (lateral view). 

Lateral nail fold
Lunula

Nail plate
Figure 19.9  Alopecia totalis. Cuticle

Proximal nail fold

Figure 19.12  Structure of the nail (dorsal view). 

Figure 19.10  Traction alopecia in a psychologically troubled 
patient. Figure 19.13  Psoriasis of the nail beds. 



410 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Figure 19.14  Lichen planus, showing longitudinal ridging of the 
nails and overgrowth of the cuticle on the nail plate (pterygium). Figure 19.15  Typical heliotrope-coloured erythema seen in 

dermatomyositis (periungual and Gottron’s papules over the 
knuckles). 

may produce similar changes. The changes described 
above arise from disturbance of the nail matrix.

Nail and nail-bed abnormalities
Disturbance of the nail bed may produce thick nails 
(pachyonychia) or separation of the nail from the bed 
(onycholysis). This occurs in psoriasis but may be idi-
opathic. Long-term tetracyclines may induce separation 
when the fingers are exposed to strong sunlight (photo-
onycholysis). The nail may be destroyed in severe lichen 
planus (Fig. 19.14) or epidermolysis bullosa (a genetic 
abnormality in which the skin blisters in response 
to minor trauma). Nails are missing in the inherited 
nail-patella syndrome. Splinter haemorrhages under 
the nails may result from trauma, psoriasis, rheumatoid 
arthritis or other ‘collagen vascular’ diseases, bacterial 
endocarditis and trichinosis.

Figure 19.16  Yellow nail syndrome in bronchiectasis. 
The nails in systemic disease
In long-lasting iron-deficiency states, the fingernails 
and toenails become soft, thin, brittle and spoon- Rarely, clubbing may be congenital. The distal end 
shaped. They lose their normal transverse convex of the digit becomes expanded, with the nail curved 
curvature, becoming flattened or concave (koilo- excessively in both longitudinal and transverse planes. 
nychia). The ‘half and half nail’, with a white proximal Viewed from the side, the angle at the nail plate is 
and red or brown distal half, is seen in some patients lost and may exceed 180°. In normal nails, when 
with chronic renal failure. Whitening of the nail plates both thumbnails are placed in apposition, there is a 
may be related to hypoalbuminaemia, as in cirrhosis lozenge-shaped gap whereas, in clubbing, there is a 
of the liver (leuconychia). Some drugs, notably reduction in this gap (Schamroth’s window test, Fig. 
antimalarials, antibiotics and phenothiazines, may 19.17). In hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, 
discolour the nail. Nail-fold telangiectasia or erythema there is clubbing of the fingers and thickening of the 
is a useful physical sign in dermatomyositis (Fig. periosteum of the radius, ulna, tibia and fibula, which 
19.15), systemic sclerosis and systemic lupus erythe- can be tender. (The causes of clubbing are listed in 
matosus. In dermatomyositis, the cuticle becomes Box 19.8.)
ragged. In systemic sclerosis, loss of finger pads may 
lead to curvature of the nail plates. An impaired 
peripheral circulation, as in Raynaud’s phenomenon, Cutaneous manifestations of  
can lead to thinning and longitudinal ridging of the internal disease
nail plate, sometimes with partial onycholysis. In 
bronchiectasis, the nails may take on a curved, yellow Genodermatoses (lesions of  
appearance (Fig. 19.16). inherited origin)
Clubbing White macules shaped like small ash leaves and 
Clubbing is probably caused by hypervascularity and present at birth may be the first sign of tuberous 
the opening of anastomotic channels in the nail bed. sclerosis. Sometimes they are difficult to see by natural 



SECTION Three
411

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Normal nail

Figure 19.18  Discoid lupus erythematosus, showing atrophic 
scars. 

a few or hundreds may be scattered over the body. 
Ichthyosis (scaly fish skin) is usually present from 
childhood and is genetic, but if ichthyosis is acquired 
in adult life, a search should be made for malignancy 
or other underlying disease.

Non-organ-specific autoimmune disorders
Several of the so-called collagen vascular diseases 

Clubbed nail show characteristic cutaneous eruptions. Systemic 
Figure 19.17  Schamroth’s window test. lupus erythematosus, seen in women between puberty 

and the menopause, may show a symmetrical ‘but-
terfly’ erythema of the nose and cheeks. In discoid 

Box 19.8  Causes of clubbing of the fingers lupus, the cutaneous lesion is localized (Fig. 19.18). 
In polyarteritis nodosa, reticular livedo of the limbs 

Cardiopulmonary disorders with purpura, vasculitic papules and ulceration occurs. 
■	 Severe chronic cyanosis In scleroderma (systemic sclerosis), acrosclerosis of 
■	 Cyanotic congenital heart disease the fingertips with scarring, ulceration and calcinosis 
■	 Chronic fibrosing alveolitis follows a Raynaud’s phenomenon of increasing sever-
■	 Chronic suppuration in the lungs: ity. Dermatomyositis often presents with a heliotrope-

–	 bronchiectasis coloured discoloration and oedema of the eyelids and 
–	 empyema with fixed erythema over the dorsa of the knuckles 
–	 lung abscess and fingers (see Fig. 19.15) and over the bony points 

■	 Carcinoma of the bronchus of the shoulders, elbows and legs. There is usually 
■	 Bacterial endocarditis weakness of the proximal limb muscles. Dermato-
Chronic abdominal disorders myositis in the middle aged is associated with internal 

malignancy in about 10% of cases.
■	 Crohn’s disease
■	 Ulcerative colitis
■	 Cirrhosis of the liver Skin pigmentation

Acanthosis nigricans is a brownish velvety thickening 
of the axillae, groins and sides of the neck. Sometimes 

light but show up under ultraviolet light (Wood’s there is thickening of the palms and soles, and warty 
light). They should be looked for in infants with excrescences may develop on the skin, eyelids and 
seizures. Pigmentation of the lips is a feature of the oral mucosa. In the middle-aged, acanthosis nigricans 
genetically determined Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, in is strongly associated with internal malignancy, but 
which multiple polyps of the stomach or colon appear benign minor forms are seen in obese young women, 
that may later undergo malignant transformation. especially in Arab people, and in children with 
Café au lait type macules, sometimes multiple, are endocrinopathies characterized by insulin resistance. 
a common sign of neurofibromatosis (NF). Another Patchy depigmented macules which are hypoanaes-
valuable sign in von Recklinghausen’s neurofibroma- thetic and associated with enlargement of the 
tosis is bilateral freckling of the axillary skin. The peripheral nerves are a feature of certain types of 
characteristic soft neurofibromata may be solitary or leprosy (Hansen’s disease).



412 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

A B

Figure 19.19  (A) Impetigo. (B) Erysipelas. 

Box 19.9  Causes of pruritus in systemic disease
■	 Iron deficiency anaemia
■	 Diabetes mellitus
■	 Thyrotoxicosis or hypothyroidism
■	 Chronic renal failure
■	 Chronic hepatic failure
■	 Biliary obstruction including primary biliary cholangitis
■	 Lymphoma and other internal malignancies
■	 Drugs, e.g. cocaine, morphine
■	 HIV infection
■	 Polycythemia vera
■	 Parasites, e.g. onchocerciasis
■	 Psychogenic

Figure 19.20  Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum. 

Generalized, severe persistent pruritus in the 
absence of obvious skin disease may be due to systemic on the foot and on the calves in small vessel disease. 
disease (Box 19.9). However, in older people with Spider naevi consist of a central arteriole feeding a 
dry skin, it is common and of no systemic significance. cluster of surrounding vessels. Many young people 
Diabetes mellitus has a number of skin manifestations; have up to seven naevi on the face, shoulders or arms. 
of these, pruritus vulvae, pruritus ani, balanoposthitis In others, pregnancy, the administration of oestrogens 
and angular stomatitis are due to Candida overgrowth. (as in oral contraceptives) and liver disease may cause 
Boils, follicular pustules or ecthyma are staphylococcal multiple lesions. Pregnancy and liver disease may also 
in origin. Impetigo and erysipelas, both streptococcal produce a blotchy erythema of the thenar and 
infections, are uncommon (Fig. 19.19). Eruptive hypothenar eminences (‘liver palms’). Leuconychia 
xanthomata are a rare feature of uncontrolled diabetes are seen in liver disease.
mellitus. Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (Fig. Erythema nodosum is a condition in which tender, 
19.20) produces reddish-brown plaques, usually on painful, red nodules appear, typically on the shins. 
the shins, with central atrophy of the skin. It has to They fade slowly over several weeks, leaving bruising, 
be distinguished from peritibial myxoedema (which but never ulcerate. Sarcoidosis and drug sensitivity 
is hypertrophic, not atrophic), the dermatoliposclerosis are the commonest causes, but other systemic disorders 
of chronic venous disease in the legs and the epidermal should be considered (Box 19.10).
hypertrophy of chronic lymphatic obstruction. Xanthomata are yellow or orange papules or nodules 

Neuropathic (‘perforating’) ulcers are found on in the skin caused by dermal aggregations of lipid-
pressure points of the heel, ball of the foot or toes loaded cells. Different patterns of hyperlipoproteinae-
and are characteristically painless. Arteriopathic mia may induce varying patterns of xanthomatosis. 
ulceration resulting from large vessel disease is seen Thus, the type Ia (hypercholesterolaemia) pattern 



SECTION Three
413

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.10  Causes of erythema nodosum from capillary haemorrhage or may form larger macules, 
depending on the extent of haemorrhage and the size of 

■	 Sarcoidosis vessels involved. Palpable purpura should raise suspicion 
■	 Drugs, e.g. sulfonamides of leucocytoclastic vasculitis. The Hess test for capillary 
■	 Streptococcal infection fragility involves deliberately inducing punctate purpura 
■	 Tuberculosis on the forearm by inflating a cuff above the elbow at 
■	 Inflammatory bowel disease 100 mmHg for 3 minutes. Sensitivity to drugs such 
■	 Behçet’s disease as aspirin may cause widespread ‘capillaritis’.
■	 Other infections, e.g. leprosy, systemic mycoses, The term ecchymosis implies a bruise, usually with 

toxoplasmosis, lymphogranuloma venereum cutaneous and subcutaneous haemorrhage causing a 
palpable lump. A frank fluctuant collection of blood 
is a haematoma. Unlike erythema and telangiectasia, 
purpura cannot be blanched by pressure. It must not 
be confused with senile haemangioma (cherry angioma 
or Campbell de Morgan spot), which is common 
in later life on the trunk and has no pathological 
significance. Haemorrhage into the thick epidermis of 
the palm or sole due to trauma (e.g. ‘jogger’s heel’) 
may induce brown or almost black macules that take 
weeks to disappear, inviting confusion with melanoma.

The skin in sexually transmitted diseases
The skin is involved in various sexually transmitted 
diseases. The primary chancre of syphilis may occur 
on the genitalia of either sex, at or near the anus, on 
the lip or, rarely, elsewhere. The rash of secondary 
syphilis is brownish-red and maculopapular and is 
one of the few rashes involving the palms and soles. 
It does not itch. Other manifestations of the secondary 
stage are condylomata lata around the anogenital 
area and snail-track ulceration and ‘mucous patches’ 
in the mouth. There may be low-grade fever, lym-
phadenopathy and splenomegaly.

Septicaemia is a rare complication of gonorrhoea 
that occurs particularly in pregnant women presenting 

Figure 19.21  Purpura in Henoch-Schönlein disease. with pustular skin lesions. Recurrent type II herpes 
simplex is common on the penis; it occurs less often 
on the buttocks, where relapses may be heralded by 

typically causes tuberous xanthomata on the extensor a radiating neuralgia. Genital viral warts are common 
aspects of the knees and elbows and on the buttocks, in both sexes. They are particularly important in 
sometimes associated with tendon xanthomata. females because there is evidence that certain viral 
Widespread eruptive xanthomata are more charac- subtypes are responsible for chronic cervical dysplasia 
teristic of hypertriglyceridaemia. White deposits of with malignant potential.
lipid (arcus senilis) in the cornea may have a similar HIV-related syndromes have many cutaneous 
explanation but may be a normal feature in those manifestations, including disseminated Kaposi’s 
over 60. Flat lipid deposits around the eyes (xanthe- sarcoma, candidiasis, molluscum contagiosum, sebor-
lasma) may be due to hyperlipidaemia but are also rhoeic dermatitis, folliculitis and oral hairy leukoplakia 
seen in the middle-aged and elderly without any (Fig. 19.22).
general metabolic upset.

Carotenaemia produces an orange-yellow colour Viral infection of the skin
to the skin, especially of the palms and soles. It occurs 
in those who eat great quantities of carrots and other Several of the most common viral infections and 
vegetables, in hypothyroidism, in diabetic patients illnesses of childhood are characterized by fever and a 
and also in those taking β-carotene for the treatment distinctive rash (exanthem), including measles, varicella 
of porphyria. and rubella. In measles, upper respiratory symptoms 

are quickly followed by a characteristic maculopapular 
Haemorrhage in the skin and erythematous rash. In rubella (German measles), 

the rash is more transient, with small papules, and 
Aggregations of extravasated red blood cells in the skin associated with occipital lymphadenopathy and only 
cause purpura (Fig. 19.21). Purpura may be punctate slight malaise. The exanthem of varicella (chickenpox) 



414 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Figure 19.22  Hairy leukoplakia. 

Figure 19.24  Herpes zoster vesicles on the ear lobe involving the 
Figure 19.23  Herpes simplex (type I). C2 dermatome. 

is papulovesicular and centripetal, and there may be rashes mimic lichen planus. A palpable rash looking 
lesions in the mouth. In herpes zoster and herpes like Henoch-Schönlein purpura indicates leucocyto-
simplex infections (Fig. 19.23), there is a non-follicular clastic vasculitis. Generalized exfoliative dermatitis 
papulovesicular rash in which the vesicles are planted may be induced by sulfonylureas, indomethacin and 
in an inflamed base. The rash is painful. In herpes allopurinol. Increasing use of biologics in clinical 
zoster, the rash follows a segmental distribution, medicine has identified unusual skin eruptions.
corresponding with skin of a dermatome. The vesicular Drugs that may sensitize the skin to sunlight 
lesion becomes encrusted (Fig. 19.24) and later, (phototoxic reaction) include tetracyclines, sulfona-
secondary infection may occur. mides and nalidixic acid. Acne-like rashes may follow 

Other less common viral infections associated with high-dose prednisolone therapy and are common 
a rash include erythema infectiosum, due to a par- with phenytoin therapy. Certain cytotoxic drugs and 
vovirus, in which the exanthem on the face gives a sodium valproate cause hair loss. Both erythema 
‘slapped-cheek’ appearance, and roseola infantum, a nodosum and erythema multiforme may be induced 
disease of toddlers which mimics rubella. by sulfonamides, including co-trimoxazole. Laboratory 

tests are of little value in the diagnosis of drug erup-
Drug eruptions tions. A carefully taken history and knowledge of the 

common patterns of drug reactions usually allow 
In the last 40 years, eruptions caused by drugs have accurate diagnosis (Box 19.11).
become common. Most such rashes are due to allergic 
hypersensitivity. Drug rashes can mimic almost every Tumours in the skin
pattern of skin disease. Thus, urticaria may be caused 
by penicillin or opiates; a measles-like (morbilliform) Exposure to the sun may, after many years, result in 
rash may be induced by ampicillin, especially when the development of many common skin tumours, for 
given to patients with infectious mononucleosis; example squamous or basal cell carcinoma or mela-
eczema-like rashes are seen with methyldopa and noma. These tumours are especially common in 
phenylbutazone therapy; and gold and chloroquine fair-skinned people. Basal cell carcinoma arises 



SECTION Three
415

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.11  Common drug eruptions

Morphological type Drug
Maculopapular Penicillin/amoxicillin
Urticaria Penicillin, non-steroidal drugs
Vasculitis Hydralazine
Fixed drug eruption Tetracyclines, phenolphthalein
Pigmentation Amiodarone, minocycline
Photosensitivity Thiazides, sulfonamides
Lupus erythematosus Isoniazid, penicillamine
Erythema nodosum Oral contraceptive pill, 

sulfonamides
Erythema multiforme Barbiturates Figure 19.26  Malignant melanoma on a male chest. The nodule 
Acneform Steroids is invasive. 
Pustular Carbamazepine
Lichenoid Thiazides, antimalarials, 

allopurinol
Psoriasiform Beta-blockers, lithium, 

antimalarials
Toxic epidermal necrolysis Carbamazepine, non-steroidal 
/ Stevens-Johnson drugs, co-trimoxazole
syndrome / erythema 
multiforme
Pemphigus ACE inhibitors
Linear IgA disease Vancomycin
Erythroderma Sulfonylureas, ACE inhibitors, 

allopurinol

Figure 19.27  A pigmented basal cell papilloma (seborrhoeic 
keratosis) on the face. This is a benign lesion. 

found in the sun-exposed elderly, especially on the 
dorsa of hands as ‘liver spots’ (Fig. 19.27). A symp-
tomatic pigmented skin lesion having an asymmetric, 
ragged border, three or more colours and diameter of 
>7 mm, particularly if it is increasing in size or bleeding 
and found on sun-damaged freckled skin, should be 
regarded as suspicious of malignant melanoma.

Special techniques in examination of  
the skin

Figure 19.25  Basal cell carcinoma. The skin is uniquely available to the examining 
physician. There are a number of diagnostic procedures 
and blood tests (Box 19.12).

especially on the face, near the nose or on the forehead Tzanck preparation
(Fig. 19.25). The lesion may be ulcerated with a firm, 
rounded edge, or papular. Melanomas may develop Tzanck preparation, an often forgotten old but valuable 
on the torso in men and legs in females. They may technique, is useful for emergency diagnosis of vesicular 
be pigmented or amelanotic and may in about a third infections or blistering eruptions such as pemphigus. 
of cases develop rapidly in a pre-existing benign mole The intact blister is opened and the base gently 
(Fig. 19.26). Staging by assessing draining regional scraped. The material obtained is smeared onto the 
sentinel lymph nodes is becoming increasingly routine microscope slide, allowed to air dry and then stained. 
in cutaneous oncology. Seborrhoeic keratoses are Viral lesions will show typical multinucleated giant 
familial, resulting in a raised warty pigmented lesions cells, and pemphigus will show acantholytic cells.



416 19 Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Box 19.12  Dermatology blood investigations

Blood test Clinical example
FBC Pruritus
Ferritin and iron studies Hail and nail
Biochemistry renal and liver Pruritus
function
Streptococcal serology Cellulitis
Autoantibodies Autoimmune disorders
Hepatitis screen Lichen planus
HSV 1 & 2 serology Erythema multiforme
Syphilis serology Secondary syphilis
HIV Persistent infections
HLA typing Dermatitis herpetiformis
DNA analysis Epidermolysis bullosa

Microscopic examination – Dermatoscopy 
(direct assessment of skin lesions)

Figure 19.28  Tinea rubrum (ringworm infection). 
Dermatoscopic and/or microscopic examination is 
useful in the diagnosis of scabies, pediculosis (lice) 
and fungal infection (tinea and candidiasis). The living in rough conditions of war or social upheaval. 
established routine use of the dermatoscope has In contrast, P. capitis is common in school children, 
become essential in the assessment of pigmented skin however clean they and their families may be, and 
lesions and aids in diagnosis of skin malignancy, is endemic in many schools.
especially malignant melanoma.

Fungal infections
Scabies Fungus may grow in the skin, nails or hair and can 
Scabies is caused by the mite Acarus (Sarcoptes) scabei. cause disease (ringworm or tinea), for example 
The female is larger than the male and burrows in the athlete’s foot (tinea pedis).
epidermis, depositing eggs. These burrows should be The most common sites of fungal infection are the 
looked for between the fingers, on the hands or wrists skin between the toes (tinea pedis) and the soles of 
and on the sides of the feet. They can be recognized the feet and the groin (tinea cruris). The lesions may 
with the naked eye as short dark lines terminating be scaly or vesicular, tending to spread in a ring form 
in a shining spot of skin. The eggs lie in the dark with central healing (Fig. 19.28); macerated, dead, 
line, the mite in the shining spot. It may be picked white, offensive-smelling epithelium is found in the 
out by means of a flat surgical needle and placed on intertriginous areas, such as the toe clefts.
a microscope slide for more detailed examination. Nail discoloration, deformity, hypertrophy and 

abnormal brittleness may result from fungus infection 
Pediculosis (tinea unguium).
Three forms of pediculosis or louse infestation occur: Ringworm of the scalp (tinea capitis) is most 
Pediculus capitis on the head, Pediculus corporis on common in children. It presents as round or oval 
the trunk, and Pediculus pubis on the pubic and axillary areas of baldness covered with short, lustreless broken-
hairs. The eggs or nits of P. pubis and P. capitis adhere off hair stumps. These hair stumps may fluoresce 
to the hairs. From their position on the hairs, one bright green under Wood’s light. Some fungi do 
can judge roughly the duration of the condition, as not fluoresce with Wood’s light, however, and these 
they are fixed at first near the root of the hair and can be detected only by microscopy and culture 
are carried up as the hair grows, so the higher the (Figs 19.29 and 19.30).
nits are, the longer the pediculi have been present. 
P. corporis should be looked for in the seams of the Microscopic examination for fungus infection
clothes, especially where the clothes come into contact Scales from the active edge of a lesion are scraped off 
with the skin, for example over the shoulders. The lightly with a scalpel or the roofs of vesicles are snipped 
bites of the parasite produce haemorrhagic spots, off with scissors. The material is placed in a drop of 
each with a dark centre and a paler areola. Marks of 10% to 20% aqueous potassium hydroxide solution 
scratching should be looked for on parts accessible on a microscope slide, covered with a coverslip and 
to the patient’s nails. P. pubis is venereally acquired left for 30 minutes to clear. It is then examined under 
and causes intense pubic itching. The nits are laid on the light microscope with the 8-mm or 4-mm objective 
the pubic hair and the lice themselves are easily using low illumination. The mycelia are recognized 
visible. P. corporis is seen only in the grossly deprived, as branching, refractile threads that boldly transgress 



SECTION Three
417

Skin, nails and hair ﻿

Figure 19.31  Disposable punch skin biopsy, especially useful 
Figure 19.29  Lactophenol blue preparation showing macronidia where minimal scarring is desirable. 
of Microsporum species, isolated from skin scrapings from a 
patient with ringworm. 

Figure 19.32  A 4-mm punch diagnostic biopsy. 
Figure 19.30  Kerion due to localized deep dermatophyte 
infection in the scalp. 

dermatitis due to contact (contact dermatitis). The 
the outlines of the squamous cells. Nails are examined formulation of the allergens is critical, and various 
in much the same way, but it is necessary to break up standard contact allergen test batteries have been 
the snippings and shavings into small fragments. These developed in different countries and clinics to include 
are either heated in potassium hydroxide or are left the commonest culprits. Patch testing is simple, but 
to clear in it overnight before being examined. the results are not always easy to interpret. Allergens 

A scalp lesion is cleaned with 70% alcohol or with are placed in shallow aluminium 1-cm2 wells and 
1% cetrimide; infected stumps and scales are removed applied in strips to the patient’s back for 48 hours 
by scraping with a scalpel. The hairs are cleaned in for initial reading and a second reading at 96 hours. 
potassium hydroxide in the same way as skin scales. This ensures that any delayed-type hypersensitivity 
Examination under the microscope reveals spores on (e.g. Coomb’s type IV reaction to an allergen) can 
the outside of the hair roots and mycelia inside the be identified.
hair substance. The species of fungus responsible may 
be established by culture on Sabouraud’s glucose-agar. Skin biopsy

Biopsy of the skin is used not only for the excision 
Wood’s light of benign and malignant tumours but also to identify 
A Wood’s light lamp emits long-wave ultraviolet light the nature of reactive and/or inflammatory lesions. 
at a peak of 360 nm. Wood’s light examination is Punch biopsy (Figs 19.31 and 19.32) is popular 
performed in a darkened room and is useful to identify because of its convenience and its minimal scarring. 
the fluorescence of fungi and corynebacterial infection The biopsy can be studied by conventional histology, 
(erythrasma), elevated porphyrins in urine or in the often supplemented by immunofluorescence and 
localization of pigmentary abnormalities. sometimes immunohistochemistry or molecular 

biology, to identify specific proteins or genetic 
Contact allergy patch testing abnormalities. Skin biopsy of fresh tissue can be sent 

for the microbiology of unusual infections and is 
Contact allergy patch testing is an important and increasingly used in diagnosis and in assessing the 
valuable tool for the diagnosis of suspected allergic progress of skin diseases.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Eyes 20 
Andrew Coombes

Introduction because of neighbouring disease, for example sinusitis. 
Excessive tear production (lacrimation) associated 

Although proportionally a greater contribution with discomfort may indicate ocular surface disease. 
towards the diagnosis of ophthalmic disorders is made There may be abnormal secretions from the eye, such 
by the examination compared to the history, it is as mucus or pus. With insufficient tears, the eye 
important to obtain a detailed account of the present- typically feels dry, whereas a painless overflow of 
ing complaint and associated visual symptoms from tears (epiphora) typically indicates blockage of the 
the patient with an ocular problem. lacrimal drainage system.

Note any previous ophthalmic history, such as a 
squint in childhood, and any pre-existing poor vision 

History or previous ocular injury or surgery. Note what type 
of glasses or contact lenses are worn: extended-wear 

Disturbance of vision, the most important ocular soft contact lenses are associated with an increased 
symptom, may be sudden or gradual, unilateral or risk of corneal infection. The family history may 
bilateral, and lead to loss of central vision or partial reveal glaucoma, decreased visual acuity, colour 
field loss. Simultaneous, bilateral visual symptoms blindness, squint or neurological disease associated 
are usually due to disease in optic pathways at with visual loss. In addition to the ocular history, the 
or posterior to the optic chiasm. Sudden visual dis- medical, drug and social histories are important.
turbance should be assessed urgently. Visual hallucina-
tions may be formed or unformed. Some visual 
symptoms have particular significance (Table 20.1). Examination
For example, haloes around lights occur in acute Eye examination is part of the cranial nerve examina-
angle-closure glaucoma due to corneal oedema. tion. It includes ocular movements (cranial nerves 
‘Floaters’ and flashes (photopsia) are indicative of III, IV and VI), corneal sensation (ophthalmic division 
vitreous or retinal disorders, respectively. The latter of the trigeminal nerve) and eye closure (VII). Assess 
may also cause objects to appear smaller (micropsia), the optic (II) nerve by testing visual acuity, colour 
larger (macropsia) or distorted (metamorphopsia). vision, the visual fields and the pupillary light reaction. 
Disorders of ocular movement may cause double Inspect the optic nerve head (the optic disc and cup) 
vision (diplopia) or visual blurring. Are the visual with the ophthalmoscope. Detailed examination of 
symptoms binocular or monocular? Are they related the anterior segment of the eye requires use of the 
to eye movements? slit lamp which, with additional equipment, can also 

Other common presentations include a red eye, be used to test the intraocular pressure (IOP) and 
abnormal lid position, protrusion of the globe and examine the retina.
pupillary or eyelid abnormality. Ocular pain is often 
associated with a red eye (Table 20.2). Ocular pain Visual acuity
due to a foreign body may be described as ‘a gritty 
sensation’ in the eye, often worsened by blinking. It Visual acuity is most reliably tested at 6 m (20 ft) 
may be associated with sensitivity to light (photo- using a standard chart such as the Snellen (Fig. 20.1a) 
phobia) but this, particularly in conjunction with or Log MAR chart (Fig. 20.1b). Tests of acuity in 
ocular aching, usually indicates serious corneal or near vision are portable but limited by age-related 
intraocular disease. Severe ocular pain with vomiting loss of accommodation (presbyopia), which neces-
may indicate acute glaucoma. Migraine often presents sitates refractive correction in older patients. These 
with bilateral visual symptoms and headache. Raised use test types of varying sizes, based on the point 
intracranial pressure and giant cell arteritis should system of the printers (Fig. 20.2), and the smallest 
also be considered when headache is associated with type that can be read comfortably at a distance of 
visual symptoms. Pain may be referred to the eye 33 cm is recorded (normally N4.5 or N5 type).



420 20 Eyes ﻿

Table 20.1  Sudden visual disturbance
Diagnosis History: visual symptoms
Vascular Ocular Amaurosis fugax Transient (minutes), unilateral

Retinal artery/vein Permanent, unilateral, often associated with systemic vascular 
occlusion disease, e.g. ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes
Non-arteritic ischaemic Permanent, unilateral, often associated with systemic vascular 
optic neuropathy (NAION) disease, e.g. ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes
Arteritic ischaemic optic Permanent, unilateral, typically associated with symptoms of giant 
neuropathy (AAION) cell arteritis, e.g. temporal headache/tenderness, jaw claudication, 

features of polymyalgia rheumatica
Papilloedema/optic disc Transient (seconds), bilateral visual obscurations, often precipitated 
swelling by coughing or bending

Cortical Transient ischaemic Transient (minutes), bilateral, associated with systemic vascular 
attack (TIA) disease, e.g. ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, etc.
Migraine Transient, bilateral, typically followed by nausea and headache
Cerebrovascular Permanent homonymous field defect, may be preceded by TIA 
accident (CVA) symptoms; note central acuity usually preserved except in bilateral 

occipital lobe infarction
Non-vascular Vitreous Posterior vitreous Transient (weeks), unilateral, floaters, occasional photopsia, central 

detachment (PVD) vision normal
Vitreous haemorrhage Transient (weeks), unilateral, multiple floaters, central vision typically 

reduced
Retina Wet age-related macular Progressive, unilateral central visual distortion (metamorphopsia)

degeneration (AMD) This condition is also known as exudative or neovascular AMD
Retinal detachment Progressive, unilateral field loss, central vision reduced if macula 

involved, often associated with symptoms of PVD
Optic nerve Optic neuritis Transient (months), unilateral, may be associated with features of 

multiple sclerosis
Acute compression Progressive, unilateral, bilateral if chiasm involved, e.g. pituitary 

apoplexy (infarction of a pituitary tumour)
Pseudo Suddenly noticed Unilateral gradual visual loss from, e.g. dry AMD or cataract

Functional Bilateral or unilateral; diagnosis of exclusion

Snellen distance vision designated 60, then the test distance should be 
On the Snellen chart, each line of letters is designated reduced. If at 1 m the 60 letter cannot be seen, assess 
by a number that corresponds to the distance at the following:
which those letters can be read by someone with ■	 Counting fingers held up at about 1 m (CFs)
‘normal’ distance vision. For example, the largest ■	 Hand movements (HMs)
letter, at the top of the chart – designated 60 – would ■	 Perception of light (PL)
be read at 60 m by a person with ‘normal’ vision. When testing low vision, ensure that the eye not 

being tested is completely covered. If a patient cannot 
read 6/6 or better in either eye, check the vision 

Technique again using a pinhole occluder (Fig. 20.3). This test 
The patient sits or stands 6 m (20 ft) from the chart. distinguishes patients with poor vision due to refrac-
Where space is limited, a mirror may be used 3 m tive error from those who have ocular or neurological 
from both patient and chart, with the patient facing conditions. In a myopic (short-sighted) eye, the rays 
away from the chart and reading the letters in the of light are focused in front of the retina. In hyper-
mirror, giving a total of 6 m. However, increasingly, metropia (long-sightedness), light is focused behind 
electronic computer screens are being used and the the eye, because the eye is abnormally short. In 
letter size can be adjusted to allow test distance to astigmatism, the cornea is not uniformly curved and 
be varied between 3 and 6 m. Distance glasses should light is not focused evenly on the retina. When using 
be worn if necessary and each eye tested separately. a pinhole, only the central rays of light pass through 
The patient should read line by line from the top of to the retina and refractive errors are significantly 
the chart. If a patient cannot see the largest letter, reduced.



SECTION Three
421

Eyes﻿ 

Table 20.2  Red eye
Diagnosis History Examination
Subconjunctival Typically asymptomatic, spontaneous Unilateral (except some trauma), contiguous red 
haemorrhage May be associated with trauma area
Viral conjunctivitis FB sensation, watering, no visual loss or Bilateral, prominent inflamed conjunctival 

photophobia vessels and follicles, enlarged tender 
Recent contact with person with red eye or URTI? preauricular lymph node

Bacterial FB sensation, discharge, no visual loss or Bilateral, prominent inflamed conjunctival 
conjunctivitis photophobia vessels, mucopus
Allergic conjunctivitis Itch, watering, no visual loss or photophobia, Bilateral, prominent inflamed conjunctival 

history of atopy vessels and follicles
Iritis (anterior uveitis) Reduced vision, aching sensation, photophobia Unilateral, prominent pericorneal vessels, small 

PMH or systemic enquiry may elicit underlying pupil, aqueous cells and flare (protein) (at slit 
disease lamp), hypopyon

Acute angle-closure Severe pain, haloes/rainbows around lights, Unilateral, pericorneal prominent vessels, 
glaucoma reduced vision, hypermetropic, elderly semidilated (oval) pupil, corneal oedema, 

shallow anterior chamber (slit lamp)
Episcleritis Mild discomfort, tenderness, no visual loss or Unilateral, typically sectorial prominent inflamed 

photophobia, young adult, otherwise fit and well subconjunctival vessels (may also be nodular or 
diffuse)

Scleritis Significant aching pain, tender, photophobia, Unilateral, typically sectorial prominent inflamed 
occasionally reduced vision, systemic enquiry deep scleral vessels (may also be nodular or 
may elicit underlying disease diffuse)

Bacterial keratitis FB sensation, watering/discharge, visual loss, Unilateral, opacity in cornea (slit lamp) stains 
photophobia with fluorescein
Pre-existing ocular surface disease, recent 
trauma or contact lens wear?

Herpetic viral FB sensation, watering/discharge, visual loss, Unilateral, branching linear dendrite(s) on 
keratitis photophobia cornea (slit lamp) stains with fluorescein

Cold sores or ophthalmic shingles?
FB, foreign body; PMH, past medical history; URTI, upper respiratory tract infection.

Recording visual acuity from one line to the other. On a LogMar chart each 
The top figure, the numerator, records the distance letter has a score value of 0.02 log units with 5 letters 
of the subject from the test chart – usually 6 m. The per line (each line therefore scores 0.1 log units). 6/6 
bottom figure records the line read by the patient. is equivalent to LogMar score 0.00 and 6/60 is 1.00. 
The normal person can read the line designated 6 at Each letter read contributes to the score; for example, 
6 m (i.e. 6/6 (20/20) vision). 6/6-1 would be recorded as 0.02. The digital output 

Record a mistake of one letter in a line as ‘−1’ and is also helpful for research and audit purposes.
a single letter read from the next smaller line as ‘+1’. 
Thus, if all except one of the letters on the line Colour vision
designated 6 are read correctly, the visual acuity is 
recorded 6/6 −1. If only one letter on that line is Tests of colour vision are important because colour 
read correctly, the visual acuity is recorded 6/9 +1. perception, especially for red, is affected in optic 
Like all ophthalmic findings except visual fields, right nerve disease before changes in visual acuity can be 
eye visual acuity is traditionally written on the left detected. Show the patient a red target one eye at a 
side of the page (as the patient’s eye appears to you) time (any bright red target can be used) and ask if 
and vice versa. Whether the patient was using glasses, there is a difference between the eyes. In the affected 
pinhole (ph) or was unaided (ua) is recorded in the eye, red appears ‘washed out’ (desaturated). Acquired 
middle (Fig. 20.4). defects of colour vision may also occur in macular 

disease. The Ishihara test (Fig. 20.5) was devised to 
Log MAR charts test for congenital colour anomalies (colour blindness) 
Increasingly, Snellen acuity tests are being replaced by but is often used to assess acquired visual disorders. 
use of a Log MAR chart, which superficially appears Most inherited colour blindness occurs in males 
similar to a Snellen chart but addresses its problems, (sex-linked recessive inheritance). It ranges from total 
namely different number of letters per line, irregular colour blindness (monochromatopsia) to subtle 
spacing between letters/lines and unequal graduation confusion between colours, typically between red 



422 20 Eyes ﻿
metric field defects are usually due to lesions anterior 
to the chiasm (i.e. in the optic nerves or retinae). 
Characteristic field defects (scotoma) occur in glau-
coma, when damage to nerve fibres occurs at the 
optic disc, typically at the inferior or superior aspect 
of the optic cup. Fundoscopy shows an increase in 
vertical length of the optic cup (see later in the 
chapter for details about how to examine the fundi) 
and field loss is arc-shaped (arcuate scotoma). If both 
the inferior and superior fields are involved, a ring-
shaped scotoma develops. Untreated glaucoma results 
in loss of the peripheral field so that only a small 
central island of vision remains (tunnel vision). 
Computerized perimetry is useful in identifying early 
visual field loss. The Humphrey field test analyser 
(Carl Zeiss), for example, provides statistical informa-
tion indicating the reliability of the test in comparison 
with a group of age-matched controls (Fig. 20.6).

Pupils
Examination of the pupils in neurology is discussed 
in Chapter 16. In ophthalmic practice, there are three 
key aspects to pupil examination: size, shape and 
reactions.

Pupil size: anisocoria
In 12% of normal individuals, the pupils are slightly 
unequal, particularly in bright light (anisocoria), but 
in these subjects they react normally. Abnormal pupils 

A dilate and constrict abnormally, and the degree of 
Figure 20.1a  Snellen chart for testing distance vision. anisocoria varies with the ambient illumination. 

However, it is often difficult to decide which pupil 
is abnormal. In the absence of local eye disease, a 
small pupil may be due to paralysis of the dilator 
pupillae muscle (sympathetic innervated), part of 

0.50 5/19 Horner’s syndrome (Fig. 20.7), in which anisocoria 
is more pronounced in low ambient light. An enlarged 

0.40 5/15 pupil suggests a parasympathetic lesion, which may 
be preganglionic in oculomotor lesions or postgan-

0.30 5/12
glionic as in the tonic pupil of Adie’s syndrome. Adie’s 

0.20 5/10 tonic pupil tends to be dilated in bright light and is 
0.10 5/8 very slow to react. A feature of both parasympathetic 
0.00 5/6
–0.10 5/5 and sympathetic lesions is denervation hypersensitivity 

caused by upregulation of receptors at the neuro-
muscular junction (adrenergic in sympathetic and 

B
cholinergic in parasympathetic). This is the basis of 

Figure 20.1b  Log MAR chart for testing distance vision. pharmacological pupil testing. In both pre- and 
postganglionic parasympathetic blockade, the pupil 

and green. About 8% of men and 0.5% of women in is supersensitive to weak cholinergic drops (e.g. 
the UK have congenital colour perception defects. pilocarpine 0.1%). In sympathetic block, dilute 
Blue/yellow deficiencies and total colour blindness adrenergic agonists such as phenylephrine 1% are 
are uncommon. unreliable, so the uptake blocker, cocaine 4%, is used. 

This dilates normal pupils but has no effect in pre- or 
Visual field testing postganglionic lesions. Hydroxyamfetamine 1% causes 

noradrenaline (norepinephrine) release from normal 
Visual field testing is described in Chapter 16. Field or intact postganglionic neurons and allows pre- and 
defects may affect one or both eyes. Symmetric postganglionic lesions to be distinguished (the synapse 
bilateral (homonymous) field defects are characteristic is located in the superior cervical ganglion). In 
of lesions posterior to the optic chiasm, and asym- complex pupil abnormalities, for example bilateral 



SECTION Three
423

Eyes﻿ 

Figure 20.2  Near vision chart based on the point system of the printer. 

Horner’s syndrome, infrared pupil imaging can be associated with reduced vision, but if central vision 
valuable. Causes of anisocoria are highlighted in Box is retained, the acuity will be normal, although severe 
20.1. In congenital Horner’s syndrome, the affected peripheral field damage may cause RAPD. In neuro-
iris is depigmented and appears blue. syphilis, the pupils are small and irregular and show 

the Argyll Robertson phenomenon (normal pupil 
Pupil reactions: afferent and central defects constriction to a near target but reduced reaction to 
The swinging light test is used to detect a relative light) owing to a midbrain defect. In Parinaud’s 
afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) resulting from syndrome, the pupils are typically large and poorly 
retinal or optic nerve disease. The test loses sensitivity reactive to light, with abnormal vertical gaze, con-
in symmetrical bilateral optic nerve disease, but this vergence retraction nystagmus and lid retraction on 
is rare, and in most bilateral cases the defect will be attempted upgaze (Collier’s sign). The causes of 
detected on the more abnormal side. RAPD is often light-near dissociation are given in Box 20.2.



424 20 Eyes ﻿

Box 20.1  Causes of anisocoria
■	 Idiopathic (12% population)
■	 Parasympathetic:

–	 third nerve palsy (external ophthalmoplegia)
–	 tonic pupil (internal ophthalmoplegia, e.g. 

Holmes-Adie)
■	 Sympathetic:

–	 Horner’s syndrome
■	 Argyll Robertson
■	 Pharmacological
■	 Ocular:

–	 iris inflammation, e.g. iritis
–	 iris ischaemia
–	 trauma
–	 iatrogenic

Box 20.2  Light-near dissociation
■	 Argyll Robertson pupil
■	 Holmes-Adie pupil
■	 Parinaud’s syndrome
■	 Aberrant third nerve regeneration
■	 Myotonic dystrophy
■	 Diabetes mellitus

Figure 20.3  Testing vision with a pinhole. Top: light is not 
focused on the retina owing to refractive error (in this case in 
front of the retina, as in myopia, or short-sightedness). Bottom: 
the use of a pinhole selects rays of light not needing to be 
focused, giving a better indication of a patient’s true best Figure 20.4  Recording visual acuity: the numerator is the test 
corrected visual acuity despite refractive error. distance. ph, pinhole. 

Figure 20.5  Ishihara colour vision test. 



SECTION Three
425

Eyes﻿ 

Box 20.3  Causes of abnormal pupil shape
■	 Congenital: Rieger’s anomaly (anterior segment 

cleavage anomalies)
■	 Trauma
■	 Iatrogenic (sphincterotomies, iridectomy, cataract 

surgery)
■	 Inflammatory (posterior synechiae in iritis)
■	 Tumour (ectropion uveae in ciliary body malignancies)
■	 Ischaemic: herpes zoster, angle-closure glaucoma
■	 Idiopathic: iridocorneal endotheliopathy (ICE) syndrome 

(which also features multiple pupils (polycoria) and 
misplaced pupils (correctopia))

Box 20.4  Risk factors for acute angle-closure glaucoma: 
dilate pupils cautiously

Figure 20.6  Automated static perimetry: the Humphrey field test 
■	 Intermittent symptoms of angle-closure attack (see 

analyser. symptoms in Table 20.2)
■	 High hypermetropia
■	 Old age
■	 Narrow anterior chamber angles (detected on slit-lamp 

gonioscopy)
■	 Family history of acute angle-closure glaucoma

under 6 months) or 1% tropicamide 
(Mydriacyl). This blurs the vision for at least 2 
hours, so patients should be forewarned and 
instructed not to drive. Some patients have a 
predisposition to closed-angle glaucoma (Box 
20.4) and dilation may precipitate an attack. 

Figure 20.7  Horner’s syndrome. On the affected side there is At-risk individuals must be warned to return if 
ptosis, which may be very slight, and a small pupil (miosis) that symptoms of acute angle closure occur.
reacts to both light and accommodation. (Reproduced with 3	 Briefly explain the examination so that the 
permission from Mir, 2003 Atlas of Clinical Diagnosis, 2nd edn, patient can cooperate fully. Ask the patient to 
Saunders, Edinburgh.) fixate on a distant target – the patient should 

continue to look in this direction even if the 
examiner’s head obscures the target.

Pupil shape 4	 Dim the room lights.
Slit-lamp examination is the best technique to assess 5	 Set the ophthalmoscope lens wheel to zero 
intrinsic ocular disease that may affect the shape and dioptres (D), unless correcting for your own 
position of the pupil (Box 20.3). short- or long-sightedness.

6	 Ensure that the ophthalmoscope light is bright. 
Direct ophthalmoscopy Unless the pupil is small, select a large light 

spot size (Box 20.5, Fig. 20.8).
The direct ophthalmoscope is an indispensable clinical 
instrument that allows direct visualization of the Examining the fundi
retina – which is part of the CNS – and its circulation. Look carefully at the optic disc/cup, the retinal vessels 
It consists of a bright, focused light source that and the retina and macula (Fig. 20.9).
illuminates the retina to allow the observer to see 
the image, magnified about 15 times. Optic disc

This marks the point where the retinal axons exit 
Preparation the back of the eye to form the optic nerve. It cor-
1	 Decide the objective of the examination. responds to the physiological blind spot. The normal 
2	 Consider dilating the pupils with 1% disc is round or slightly oval. If there is astigmatism, 

cyclopentolate (Mydrilate) (0.5% in children the disc may appear more oval than normal. There 



426 20 Eyes ﻿

ST

SN
F

M OC OD

IN

IT

Figure 20.9  Normal fundus anatomy. OC, optic cup; OD, optic 
disc. Retinal vascular arcades: F, fovea; IN, inferonasal; IT, 
inferotemporal; M, macula; SN, superonasal; ST, superotemporal. 

Figure 20.8  Examining the right eye with the direct 
ophthalmoscope. 

Box 20.5  Technique of ophthalmoscopy
■	 Use your LEFT eye for the patient’s LEFT eye, holding the 

ophthalmoscope with your LEFT hand and using your 
RIGHT hand with thumb over the LEFT brow to steady 
the patient’s head (the opposite approach is used for 
the right eye) (Fig. 20.8).

■	 First, at arm’s length, look for and examine the red 
reflex (like that in flash photographs). The red reflex is 
dimmed in elderly people with cataracts, and these may 
obscure the retina. In a child, congenital cataract and 
retinoblastoma may abolish the red reflex. Figure 20.10  Primary optic atrophy. The disc is pale and whiter 

■	 Looking at the red reflex through the ophthalmoscope, than normal, and its edges are unusually sharply demarcated from 
gradually close in on the eye to examine the anterior the retina. The retinal vessels are slightly attenuated. 
ocular structures. Use the +20 D lens to view the cornea 
and the +15 D lens for the iris. Some ophthalmoscopes 
have a lever to switch to these lenses. Box 20.6  Causes of optic atrophy

■	 Then, with a zero lens setting, locate the optic disc. If it 
is difficult to find, locate any blood vessel and follow it ■	 Congenital:
towards the optic disc. Fine-tune the focus with 1-2 D –	 dominant and recessive
lens steps; if the focus worsens, reverse the other way. ■	 Optic neuritis
If your eye is emmetropic and your accommodation is ■	 Chronic papilloedema
relaxed, the strength of the lens necessary to bring the ■	 Toxic:
fundus into focus gives an indication of the refractive –	 tobacco, lead, alcohol
error of the patient’s eye (plus or red lenses indicate ■	 Optic nerve compression:
hypermetropia and minus or black lenses myopia). –	 thyroid

■	 Compare the two eyes. There is a broad range of normal –	 tumour
appearances, so if an unusual appearance is ■	 Post-traumatic (direct optic nerve or indirect vascular 
symmetrical, it could be a variant of normal. damage)

are four key questions to consider when viewing the is a reduction in the number of capillaries 
optic disc: crossing the edge of the disc, from the normal 
1	 Is the colour normal? The normal disc is 10 to 7 or fewer (Kestenbaum’s sign). The 

yellow-pink and its temporal side is paler. An causes of optic atrophy are listed in Box 20.6. 
abnormally pale disc is a sign of optic atrophy In primary optic atrophy due to optic nerve 
(Fig. 20.10). In addition, in optic atrophy there lesions, the disc is flat and white, with clear-cut 



SECTION Three
427

Eyes﻿ 

Figure 20.11  Papilloedema: optic disc swelling due to raised Figure 20.12  Severe papilloedema with retinal haemorrhages. 
intracranial pressure. 

Box 20.7  Causes of the appearance of optic disc swelling disc (3 D is equivalent to 1 mm of swelling). If 
papilloedema develops rapidly, there will be 

■	 Raised intracranial pressure (papilloedema) marked engorgement of the retinal veins with 
■	 Infiltration: haemorrhages and exudates on and around the 

–	 lymphoma disc, but with papilloedema of slow onset there 
–	 sarcoid may be little or no vascular change, even though 

■	 Vascular: the disc may become very swollen. The retinal 
–	 hypertension (grade 4) vessels will, however, bend sharply as they dip 
–	 central retinal vein occlusion down from the swollen disc to the surrounding 
–	 anterior ischaemic optic neuropathy retina. The oedema may extend to the adjacent 

■	 Pseudopapilloedema: retina, producing greyish-white striations near 
–	 congenital small discs the disc (Paton’s lines), and a macular fan of 
–	 high hypermetropia hard exudates temporal to the fovea may 

■	 Optic disc drusen develop in some cases.
3	 Is the central cup enlarged? The cup is a 

physiological central depression formed at the 
optic disc as nerve fibres leave the retina to 

edges. Secondary optic atrophy follows swelling form the optic nerve. It marks the point where 
of the optic disc due to papilloedema: the disc the retinal vessels enter and leave the eye. It is 
is greyish-white, with indistinct edges. paler than the surrounding rim of the disc. The 

2	 Are the margins distinct? The disc margin optic cup : disc ratio is estimated by comparing 
should be sharply defined. In optic disc swelling, their ratios vertically. In chronic open-angle 
this clear edge is obscured (Fig. 20.11) and glaucoma, the ratio is increased (>0.3) – optic 
venous pulsations are abolished. However, disc cupping. When the cup is deep, in 
venous pulsations may be difficult to see in advanced glaucoma, retinal vessels disappear as 
some normal subjects. Some important causes  they climb from the floor to the rim, and 
of disc swelling are listed in Box 20.7. In reappear as they bend sharply over the edge of 
papilloedema, caused by raised intracranial the rim (bayonetting); in less advanced cases, 
pressure, the disc is abnormally red and its the cup appears as a vertical oval extending  
margins are blurred, especially at the upper and to the edge of the disc (Fig. 20.13). In myopic 
lower margins, and particularly in the upper individuals, the disc and cup appear large, and 
nasal quadrant. The physiological cup becomes mimic glaucoma. Myopes often have a partial 
obliterated and the retinal veins are slightly ring of pigmentation or white sclera surrounding 
distended. As the condition progresses, the disc the disc, which is easily mistaken for the edge  
becomes more definitely swollen (Fig. 20.12). In of the cup. In severe myopia, degenerative 
order to measure the degree of swelling, start chorioretinal changes may occur in the fundus, 
with a high plus lens in the ophthalmoscope which can involve the macula and impair 
and reduce the power until the centre of the central vision.
disc is just in focus. The retina, a short distance 4	 Are there any other abnormal features? In 
from the disc, is then brought into focus by proliferative diabetic retinopathy, new blood 
further reduction of the lens power. This further vessels (neovascularization) develop at the optic 
reduction indicates the degree of swelling of the disc. Myelinated nerve fibres have a dramatic 



428 20 Eyes ﻿

Figure 20.13  Glaucomatous disc cupping. The cup is oval in the Figure 20.15  Retinal arteriolar emboli. Cholesterol emboli in the 
vertical plane and appears pale. The retinal vessels are displaced retinal arteries of a patient with atheromatous disease of the 
nasally. internal carotid artery in the neck. 

Figure 20.14  Myelinated nerve fibres: the white area obscures 
the disc; this is a normal variant. 

white appearance, but they are a unilateral, 
harmless and non-progressive congenital 
anomaly (Fig. 20.14). They have a characteristic 
feathered edge that may obscure the retinal Figure 20.16  Hypertensive retinopathy. The arteries are irregular 
vessels. in calibre and show ‘silver wiring’. Arteriovenous nipping is 

present. Characteristic ‘flame-shaped’ haemorrhages and ‘cotton 
Blood vessels wool’ spots (arrow) can be seen. 
There are four pairs of arterioles and venules, which 
form the main retinal vascular arcades that emerge 
from the optic disc: superotemporal (above the 
macula), inferotemporal (below the macula), supe-
ronasal, and inferonasal. Study each in turn. Arterioles Box 20.8  Appearance and classification of  
are thin, bright red in colour and with a longitudinal hypertensive retinopathy
streak of light reflection. In branch arteriolar occlusion, 

■
a bright yellow (cholesterol) embolus may occasionally 	 Grade 1: arteriolar narrowing (attenuation) and vein 

be seen (Fig. 20.15). In diabetes or venous occlusion, concealment
■

the venules are larger, darker and often dilated or 	 Grade 2: profound arteriolar attenuation and venous 

tortuous. Look carefully at arteriolar/venous crossings: deflections at crossings (AV nipping)
■

compression and localized dilatation of venules 	 Grade 3: severe attenuation ‘arteriolar copper wiring’, 

(arteriovenous (AV) nipping) with arteriolar narrowing haemorrhages, cotton wool spots and hard exudates
■

(attenuation) is a sign of hypertension (Box 20.8, 	 Grade 4: all of the above, plus very severe attenuation 

Fig. 20.16). Spontaneous arteriolar pulsation is an ‘arteriolar silver wiring’ and optic disc swelling



SECTION Three
429

Eyes﻿ 
abnormal finding that may occur if the IOP is very Box 20.9  Common retinal abnormalities
high or the central retinal artery pressure very low. 
Spontaneous venous pulsation is frequently seen in White
normal eyes, but is reduced in papilloedema. ■	 Cotton wool spots: white, fluffy, indistinct areas 

indicative of retinal ischaemia. This is the accumulation 
Retina and macula of axonal proteins in the nerve fibre layer. Causes 
As each main vascular arcade is followed and exam- include severe hypertension, diabetes and retinal vein 
ined, the adjacent and peripheral retina can be sys- occlusion
tematically assessed. The macula is the central retinal ■	 Chorioretinal atrophy: well-defined ‘punched-out’ lesions 
area bounded by temporal vascular arcades. It measures (the white is the sclera). May occur in conjunction with 
approximately five disc diameters across. The fovea retinal pigment hypertrophy. Associated with previous 
at its centre is one disc diameter in size. The fovea, retinal inflammation or injury (including retinal laser)
with its high density of cone photoreceptors, is Yellow
responsible for fine discriminatory vision. To find the 

■
fovea, locate the optic disc and move the ophthal- 	 Hard exudates: bright yellow with well-demarcated 
moscope beam temporally (move yourself toward edges consisting of lipid deposits that have leaked out 
the nose). Alternatively, ask the patient to look directly of abnormal blood vessels. Most commonly associated 
into the light. However, if the pupil is undilated, it with microaneurysms in diabetes (Fig. 20.17)

■
tends to constrict at this point, and the patient may 	 Drusen: small multifocal round yellow features, usually 
recoil because of dazzle (you can dim the light beam located in the central macula. Generally smaller and 
to make it more comfortable). In young patients, the less bright yellow than hard exudates. Typically bilateral 
retina is very reflective and there is often a small and relatively symmetrical. Common in elderly people 
yellow dot in the middle of the fovea (macula lutea associated with ‘dry’ age-related macular degeneration
or fovea centralis). Box 20.9 and Figs 20.17 and 20.18 Red
identify common retinal abnormalities by their colour ■	 Microaneurysms: the dots that typify diabetic 
and appearance. retinopathy. They may leak to cause exudates or bleed to 

cause blot haemorrhages (Fig. 20.17)
Slit lamp and intraocular pressure ■	 Blot haemorrhages: rounded localized intraretinal blood, 

typically due to diabetic retinopathy, but other causes 
The slit lamp (Fig. 20.19) provides a stereoscopic, include severe hypertension and retinal vein occlusion
magnified view of the eye and is the key examina- ■	 Deep large haemorrhages: associated with retinal 
tion tool for ophthalmologists. Many accident and ischaemia when numerous

■	 Flame haemorrhages: have a characteristic feathery 
shape as the blood is in the nerve fibre layer; may be 
present in retinal vein occlusion (Fig. 20.18). Not 
typically associated with ischaemia

Black
■	 Retinal pigment hypertrophy: well-defined black lesions, 

often in conjunction with chorioretinal atrophy. May 
occur with previous retinal inflammation or injury 
(including retinal laser therapy).

Figure 20.17  Diabetic retinopathy. Microaneurysms (tiny red 
dots), blot haemorrhages, hard exudates and areas of new vessel 
formation (arrow) are characteristic of this condition. In many Figure 20.18  Branch retinal vein occlusion. There are flame-
patients, hypertensive retinopathy is also present. shaped retinal haemorrhages, but the disc is normal. 



430 20 Eyes ﻿

Figure 20.19  Slit lamp. 

emergency departments have a slit lamp, and it can 
be invaluable for assessing suspected foreign bodies 
and corneal abrasions. Some direct ophthalmoscopes Figure 20.20  Everting the upper eyelid to expose the tarsal 
are equipped with a slit-lamp beam, which can be conjunctiva. 
useful. Alternatively, the anterior orbital structures 
and globe can be examined with a bright torch 
and basic magnification, and the same principles of ■	 Conjunctival surfaces (tarsal, forniceal and 
systematic examination apply. The slit lamp comprises bulbar). This mucous membrane lines the 
a table-mounted binocular microscope column with eyeball (bulbar conjunctiva) and the inner 
an adjustable illumination source that produces a surface of the eyelids (tarsal conjunctiva). The 
narrow, slit beam of light. conjunctiva may be pale in anaemia, yellow in 

The patient is seated with forehead and chin sup- jaundice or red (injected) in conjunctivitis and 
ported. The slit beam illumination and microscope other inflammatory eye disorders. Directing the 
have a common axis of rotation and coincident focal patient’s gaze up, down, left and right ensures 
lengths, allowing the angle of illumination to be varied that all the bulbar conjunctiva is viewed. To 
along with its width, length and intensity. Projected examine the inferior tarsal conjunctiva of the 
onto the globe, the slit beam illuminates an optical lower lid, the lower lid should be gently everted 
cross-section of the eye’s transparent structures, and and the patient asked to look upwards. To 
this can be viewed with magnification varying from examine the superior tarsal conjunctiva – for 
10× to 40× power. An attachment allows the IOP to example if a foreign body is suspected – ask the 
be measured (tonometry). The drainage angle can be patient to look downwards (Fig. 20.20). Grasp 
seen with a special contact lens (gonioscopy) and, the lashes between the forefinger and thumb, 
with the aid of a hand-held lens or a contact lens, gently pull down on them and rotate the eyelid 
the retina can also be viewed. upwards over either the other thumb or a 

The following structures can be examined: cotton bud.
■	 Lid margins, meibomian gland orifices and ■	 Cornea and tear film. The transparent cornea 

lashes. Inflammation of the lid margins can be viewed in cross-section. The addition of 
(blepharitis) is one of the commonest a drop of 2% fluorescein reveals defects or 
ophthalmic conditions. It is related to chalazia, foreign bodies in the corneal epithelium and the 
blocked meibomian glands and infected lash tear film can be assessed (Fig. 20.21). The tear 
follicles (styes). The puncta, on the medial meniscus on the lower eyelid should be 
aspect of the lids, drain tears into the canalicular symmetrical and less than 1 mm thick, and the 
tear drainage pathway. Misdirected lashes tear break-up time should be more than 10 
(trichiasis) causing foreign body sensations occur seconds. Fluorescein also aids the identification 
with chronic lid disease. of aqueous leakage in a penetrating corneal 



SECTION Three
431

Eyes﻿ 

Figure 20.21  Fluorescein used to stain the cornea and tear film. 

injury (Seidel’s test). Arcus senilis is a common Figure 20.22  Goldman tonometry. 
crescentic opacity near the periphery of the 
cornea. It usually starts at the lower part of the 
cornea, extending to form a complete circle. It ■	 Anterior vitreous. This is best examined when 
is common in old people but may occur in the the pupil is dilated. Opacities may be observed, 
young (arcus juvenilis) in association with type most easily using a green light. Cells in the 
IV hyperlipoproteinaemia. Corneal sensation vitreous may be associated with ocular 
should be tested. inflammation (vitritis), trauma (vitreous 

■	 Anterior chamber (filled with aqueous). In iritis, haemorrhage) or retinal holes/detachment 
a cause of red eye, there is inflammation in the (retinal pigment).
aqueous, with flare (protein) and cells (typically 
leukocytes). In severe iritis, the inflammatory Measuring intraocular pressure:  
exudate settles inferiorly to create a white fluid applanation tonometry
level in the anterior chamber (hypopyon). Intraocular pressures between 10 and 21 mmHg are 
Hyphaema has a similar but red appearance considered normal. An increased IOP is a characteristic 
caused by bleeding into the anterior chamber, feature of glaucoma. A diminished IOP occurs in 
usually due to trauma. diabetic coma and in severe dehydration from any 

■	 Iris. Note any difference in the colour of the cause. The IOP may be assessed by palpating the 
two eyes (heterochromia), abnormality in the eyeball, although only gross variations from normal 
shape or size of the pupils or signs of iritis. In can be appreciated. More accurate is applanation 
iritis, the pupil may be constricted (miosis) or tonometry, in which the force required to flatten 
irregular owing to the formation of adhesions (applanate) an area of a sphere (the cornea) is pro-
(posterior synechiae) between the edge of  portional to the pressure within the sphere (Fig. 
the pupil and the anterior surface of the lens. 20.22). Topical anaesthetic and fluorescein are applied 
Blunt trauma can cause a dilated (mydriasis) to the cornea and a bright cobalt blue filter is used 
unreactive pupil with radial ruptures in the iris. to illuminate the sterile tonometer head. Contact 
An irregular or teardrop-shaped pupil and a between tonometer head and cornea creates a thin 
history of a high-velocity foreign body is highly green circular outline of fluorescein, and a prism in 
suspicious of a penetrating eye injury where the the head splits this into two semicircles. The tonometer 
iris has plugged the leaking wound. Other force is adjusted manually until the semicircles just 
abnormalities of the pupils are described in overlap, and is read in millimeters of mercury (mmHg; 
Chapter 16. Fig. 20.23).

■	 Lens. Cataracts are usually due to ageing 
(central nuclear sclerosis) but also occur in 
diabetes mellitus, after injury and in certain Eyelid, lacrimal and orbital assessment
hereditary diseases, for example myotonic 
dystrophy. Posterior subcapsular cataract is a 
common side effect of corticosteroid therapy. Eyelids
Blunt eye injury may cause partial dislocation of People of Asian origin have a long, narrow palpebral 
the lens (subluxation) or complete dislocation aperture with an upward and outward obliquity and 
into the vitreous cavity. a characteristic fold of skin along the upper lid. The 



432 20 Eyes ﻿

Dial reading less Dial reading equals Dial reading greater
than globe pressure globe pressure than globe pressure

Figure 20.23  Diagrammatic representation of tonometry. 

Figure 20.25  Lower eyelid entropion causing infective keratitis 
and corneal opacification. 

Figure 20.24  Thyroid eye disease with upper eyelid retraction 
and mild exophthalmos (bilateral proptosis). 

highest point of the aperture is typically at the junc-
tion of its middle and inner thirds. In Down’s syn-
drome, the palpebral fissure is also oblique. However, 
it is also short and wide, with its highest point at the 
centre of the lid.

Normally no sclera is visible above the limbus (the 
corneoscleral junction). The commonest cause of 
scleral show is eyelid retraction (Fig. 20.24) due to 
dysthyroid eye disease, accompanied by other signs 
such as lid lag, in which movement of the upper lid 
seems to lag behind that of the eyeball when the Figure 20.26  Schirmer’s test for dry eyes. 
patient looks downwards. In parkinsonism, there may 
be reduced blink frequency. Look for reduced eyelid 
closure (lagophthalmos) and levator muscle function. 
Ptosis (drooping of the upper lid) may be congenital wards and inwards. Acute inflammation (dacryo
or acquired (check old photographs). In age-related adenitis) causes a tender swollen gland, with oedema 
ptosis, owing to levator disinsertion, levator function of the upper lid and localized conjunctival injection. 
is retained and there is a high upper eyelid skin crease. Chronic dacryoadenitis, a painless enlargement of 
In ptosis due to myogenic or neurogenic lesions, there the lacrimal gland which is frequently bilateral, occurs 
is reduced levator function (see Ch. 16). In entropion, in sarcoidosis and lymphoproliferative disorders. 
there is inversion of the lid margin with associated Tumours of the lacrimal gland produce a hard swelling 
malpositioning of the lashes, which may rub on the of the gland associated with displacement of the 
cornea (Fig. 20.25); and in ectropion, eversion of the globe. Involvement of the lacrimal gland by any 
eyelid is often associated with watering. The lower disease process may cause a dry eye.
lid is prone to skin tumours, particularly basal cell Assess the position and size of the puncta (see 
and squamous cell carcinomas (see Fig. 19.25). above). Painless watering is a feature of obstruction 
Xanthelasmas are fatty deposits that develop in the of the tear drainage pathway, but exclude reflex 
upper and lower eyelids in patients with long-standing tearing and overflow from, for example, a dry eye. 
hypercholesterolaemia. Schirmer’s test uses a standardized strip of filter paper 

to detect dry eyes by assessing the extent of wetting 
Lacrimal at 5 minutes (Fig. 20.26). Overt nasolacrimal duct 

blockage can be excluded if the patient reports fluid 
Examine the lacrimal gland by pulling up the outer at the back of the throat on probing and syringing 
part of the upper lid while the patient looks down- with normal saline (Fig. 20.27).



SECTION Three
433

Eyes﻿ 

Figure 20.29  Hertel exophthalmometry to quantify proptosis or 
exophthalmos. 

example in ipsilateral eyelid retraction or myopia 
(where the eye is longer than normal) or when there 
is contralateral ptosis or enophthalmos.

Figure 20.27  Syringe and probing to assess nasolacrimal duct Proptosis and enophthalmos can be measured with 
function. the Hertel exophthalmometer (Fig. 20.29). A differ-

ence of >2 mm between sides is abnormal. A proptosis 
that increases while the patient performs a Valsalva 
manoeuvre is suggestive of a venous abnormality. 
Pulsatile proptosis with an orbital bruit is a feature 
of carotid cavernous fistula.

Blunt trauma to the orbit may cause a blowout 
fracture of the thin orbital floor. Orbital contents 
may prolapse through the fracture, restricting the 
movement of the inferior rectus muscle and limiting 
upgaze. A full orbital examination should include 
palpation, eye movement examination, optic nerve 
assessment and testing of the trigeminal nerve for 
altered sensation.

Examination of the eye in children
The advice given in Chapter 6 on the examination 
of children in general is also important when examin-
ing children’s eyes. Children may object strongly to 
lights and instruments, particularly when they are 

Figure 20.28  Axial CT orbits in TED. Left-sided thyroid eye wielded by white-coated strangers. Allow the child 
disease with exophthalmos and marked hypertrophy (inflammation) to get used to the surroundings while taking a history 
of the medial and lateral rectus muscles on that side. These from the parent, but do not ignore the child. Con-
muscles in the other eye are also slightly enlarged. The optic nerve stantly observe the child, noting visual behaviour, the 
can clearly be seen between the enlarged muscles on the left side. position and movements of the eyes and the general 

appearance of each eye.
Visual maturation continues after birth and without 

Orbit a focused retinal image, the visual pathways fail to 
develop properly, a condition known as amblyopia. 

The most common cause of forward displacement Untreated, sight loss from amblyopia becomes irrevers-
of the eyeball – proptosis when unilateral, or exoph- ible. It is therefore important to assess visual acuity 
thalmos when bilateral – is thyroid eye disease (TED) in preverbal and young children. Babies should rapidly 
(see Fig. 18.13). This can cause corneal exposure and fix a large object – for example the examiner’s face 
ulceration. Optic nerve damage may occur despite – and follow it. After 6 months, ‘continuous’ and 
minimal proptosis. Axial proptosis, in the primary ‘steady’ fixation that is ‘maintained’ (‘CSM’) during 
direction of the eye in forward gaze, is typical of a blink should be demonstrable. If an infant strongly 
TED and of tumours in the extraocular muscle cone objects to your covering an eye for even a short time, 
behind the eye (intraconal mass lesions) (Fig. 20.28). consider whether the non-covered eye may not be 
Non-axial proptosis occurs in association with space- seeing well. A more sophisticated assessment can be 
occupying orbital lesions outside the muscle cone, made using ‘preferential looking’. Cards are presented 
for example lacrimal gland tumours; these displace to the child with a grating drawn at one end and 
the globe forward and inferomedially. Apparent none at the other. The child will prefer to look at 
(‘pseudo’) proptosis causes diagnostic confusion: for the image rather than nothing. Successively smaller 



434 20 Eyes ﻿

Figure 20.30  Kay picture-matching test to assess the visual 
acuity of children 2 years and older. Figure 20.31  Dacryocystogram showing restricted flow of 

radiopaque dye in the right nasolacrimal duct. 

spatial gratings are shown until the child does not 
see them. The grating seen can be converted to an 
approximate Snellen acuity (the vision of a 1-year-old 
equates to approximately 6/12), although testing 
each eye independently in this age group is difficult. 
From the age of 2 years, a more accurate estimate of 
acuity can be made using the Kay picture-matching 
test (Fig. 20.30), and from 3 years the Sheridan-
Gardiner letter-matching test. In these tests, the child, 
or the child’s parent, holds a card with a number of 
pictures or numbers on it. The examiner holds up 
an image and asks the child to match this target to 
one on the card – the targets vary in size.

Next, the position and movements of the eyes 
should be assessed. The least disturbing method is 
to observe the corneal light reflex: a light held at 
about 1 m should produce a reflection in the centre 
of each pupil. If the reflection in one eye is at a 
different location from that in the other, there may Figure 20.32  Coronal CT orbits in blowout fracture. The right 
be a squint (although a wide intercanthal distance bony orbital floor is fractured and the orbital contents prolapsed. 
may give this appearance). If a squint is suspected, 
a cover and alternate cover test should be performed. 
Assess the ocular movements and the pupillary lacrimal duct obstruction (Fig. 20.31). It is particularly 
responses to light and accommodation. Examine the useful in the watering eye, when carcinoma is sus-
media and fundi with the ophthalmoscope through pected, when repeat surgery is planned or when 
the dilated pupil. Because of limited cooperation, trauma has occurred.
refraction testing may be limited to the retinoscopy 
assessment. In general, only children with refractive Computed tomography and magnetic 
errors so severe that there is a risk of amblyopia resonance imaging
require treatment.

CT and MRI are used extensively in the diagnosis of 
orbital disease. CT is often considered superior because 

Imaging it defines the bony orbit, but the X-ray dose to the 
eye and lens is not inconsiderable. CT is the investiga-

Plain X-rays tion of choice in blunt orbital trauma and blowout 
fractures (see above), where fine-cut coronal spiral 

Plain X-rays have a limited role in the detection of images are desirable (Fig. 20.32).
foreign bodies, but have been largely superseded by 
computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). Ultrasound is used to assess the globe. A- and B-mode ultrasound
A dacryocystogram uses a radiopaque dye introduced The A-mode scan is a one-dimensional time-amplitude 
into the lacrimal drainage system to identify sites of study commonly used to assess axial length, which 



SECTION Three
435

Eyes﻿ 
is an essential measurement for lens implant calcula- Retinal photography and fundus 
tion prior to cataract surgery. The B-mode scan gives 
a two-dimensional cross-sectional view of the eye for fluorescein angiography
the diagnosis of both intraocular and orbital tumours, Retinal photography alone is useful to document 
retinal detachments and intraocular disorders posterior segment abnormalities and allow monitoring, 
when the fundal view is impaired (e.g. with vitreous for example of a choroidal naevus. In conjunction with 
haemorrhage; Fig. 20.33). the intravenous injection of sodium fluorescein pho-

tography it gives a detailed assessment of the retinal 
and choroidal vasculature (Figs 20.34 and 20.35). A 
blue filtered light excites fluorescence (530 nm) as 
the dye circulates. Fundus fluorescein angiography is 
useful in investigating diabetic retinopathy, age-related 
macular degeneration and retinal ischaemia. Minor 
side effects, including transient nausea and yellow 
discoloration of the skin and urine, are common. 
Severe anaphylaxis is, fortunately, very rare.

Retinal and optic disc tomography
Optical coherence tomography (OCT)  
and optic disc tomography

Figure 20.33  B-mode ultrasound scan showing lens opacity and Becoming increasingly widely used clinically, optical 
vitreous opacities but no retinal detachment following penetrating coherence tomography (OCT) is based on interfer-
trauma. C, cornea; L, lens; ON, optic nerve; V, vitreous. ometry, typically using near infrared light, to obtain 

Figure 20.34  Fluorescein retinal angiogram of fundus in papilloedema. Note the late-phase leakage of the dye. 

Figure 20.35  Fluorescein retinal angiogram of fundus in pseudopapilloedema. 



436 20 Eyes ﻿

NFL

ICN FP

PR

RPE

C

Figure 20.36  Ocular coherence tomography image of a normal 
macula. C, choroid; RPE, retinal pigment epithelium; PR, 
photoreceptor layer; ICN, inter-connecting neurone layer; NFL, 
nerve fibre layer; FD, foveal depression. 

high-resolution (2-20 µm) cross-sectional images of 
the retina (Fig. 20.36) and optic disc. Optical coher-
ence tomography angiography (OCTA) is a newer Figure 20.37  Amsler grid for testing macular function. 
development that compares motion contrast imaging 
to high-resolution volumetric blood flow information 
to generate non-invasive retinal angiography images 
without injection of fluorescein. OCT has also been 
developed to generate images of the anterior segment 
(ACOCT), for example showing the angle structures 
in high resolution. In addition to OCT, a variety 
of techniques have been developed to image and 
assess the shape of the optic disc that are particularly 
useful in the management of glaucoma. These include 
scanning laser polarimetry (SLP) and the scanning 
laser ophthalmoscope (SLO) which assesses nerve 
fibre thickness indirectly.

Special examination techniques
Refraction and refractive assessment
A refraction test will ascertain the optical power of 
an eye, with a view to prescribing glasses or contact 
lenses. An objective refraction is performed using 
neutralizing lenses in conjunction with a retinoscope. 
In adults and cooperative children, this is then refined Figure 20.38  Indirect ophthalmoscopy, here used 
subjectively by placing neutralizing lenses in front of intraoperatively. Note the head light and hand-held 20 D lens. 
the eye and simultaneously assessing visual acuity. 
Increasingly, the retinoscope is being replaced by an 
automated technique (the autorefractor).

hand-held lens in front of the patient’s eye, allows a 
Amsler grid much greater area of the fundus to be visualized (Fig. 

20.38). The retinal periphery is more readily seen.
The Amsler grid is a sensitive test of macular function. 
It comprises a series of vertical and horizontal lines Electrophysiological tests
with a central spot for fixation (Fig. 20.37). The 
patient is asked to look at this spot and describe any Visual evoked potentials (VEP), recorded from the 
distortions or missing areas in the grid. occipital cortex using scalp electrodes while the 

patient views an alternating black-and-white cheq-
Indirect ophthalmoscopy uerboard stimulus, have a role in the diagnosis of 

disease of the visual pathway. The principal waveform 
Binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy, using a light recorded from the scalp is a positive deflection occur-
source supported on the examiner’s head and a ring about 100 ms after the stimulus (the P100 wave). 



SECTION Three
437

Eyes﻿ 
This is attenuated in amplitude and increased in with a reference electrode placed on the forehead. 
latency in disease of the optic nerve, for example Flash, flicker or pattern stimuli are used to generate 
optic neuritis or optic nerve compression. Electro electrical responses from retinal activation. This is 
retinograms (ERG) measure the electrical potential useful in assessing hereditary or acquired retinal 
across the eye, recorded with a corneal electrode, degeneration.



This page intentionally left blank



SECTION THREE
BASIC SYSTEMS

Ear, nose and throat 21 
Michael J. Wareing

Introduction retract if there is prolonged negative middle ear pres-
sure secondary to Eustachian tube dysfunction. The 

This chapter describes the assessment of potential malleus, incus and stapes are three small connecting 
diseases of the ear, nose and throat. The formal title bones (ossicles) (Fig. 21.3) that transmit sound across 
of the specialty is otorhinolaryngology, which has the middle ear from the drum to the cochlea. The 
many interactions with oral and maxillofacial surgery, handle of the malleus lies within the fibrous layer 
although more details of the latter are too specialized of the pars tensa. Within the middle ear, the head 
for an undergraduate textbook. of the malleus articulates with the incus in the attic, 

There is a close functional and anatomical relation- the upper portion of the middle ear space. The long 
ship between the ear, the nose and the throat. Disease process of the incus articulates with the stapes. This 
in one area may have manifestations in another area. articulation (the incudostapedial joint) is liable to 
Symptoms in one area may likewise refer to another disruption from trauma or chronic infection. The 
area, so an accurate assessment requires a thorough stapes footplate sits in the oval window, and transmits 
history and examination of the entire area to elucidate and amplifies sound to the fluid-filled inner ear.
a cause. Ear, nose and throat (ENT) is a highly clinical The inner ear has two portions. The cochlea (Fig. 
subject because much is visible, especially with 21.4), the spiral organ of hearing, is a transducer that 
modern examination techniques. Therefore, myriad converts sound energy into digital nerve impulses 
modern imaging and other investigations are often that are transmitted by the eighth cranial nerve 
unnecessary. (cochlear) to the brainstem and thence to the auditory 

cortex. The organ of Corti (Fig. 21.5) within the 
cochlea contains hair cells that detect frequency-

The ear specific sound energy; low-frequency sounds are 
detected in the apical region and high-frequency 

Anatomy sounds are detected in the basal region. The inner 
ear is also concerned with balance. The semicircular 

The ear (Fig. 21.1) consists of the external, middle canals and the vestibule contain receptors that detect 
and inner ears. The external ear consists of the pinna angular and linear motion in the three cardinal x, y 
and external auditory canal (meatus). The cartilaginous and z planes. The inner ears are only one component 
pinna is covered with perichondrium and skin, forming of the balance system; visual input and proprioception 
the helix and antihelix. The meatus has an outer from joints and muscles are also important.
cartilaginous and an inner bony component. The skin The facial (seventh cranial) nerve (Fig. 21.6) is 
overlying the external auditory meatus contains hair important in otological practice. It runs from the 
cells and modified sebaceous glands which produce brainstem through the cerebellopontine angle to the 
wax (cerumen). Desquamated skin debris, mixed internal auditory meatus (IAM) with the cochlear 
with cerumen, migrates outward from the drum and and vestibular (eighth) nerves. The facial nerve passes 
deep canal and makes the external ear a self-cleaning through the temporal bone and leaves the skull 
system. through the stylomastoid foramen near the mastoid 

The opaque or semitranslucent eardrum (tympanic process. It may be damaged when there is suppurative 
membrane) separates the middle and external ears middle ear disease or trauma. The chorda tympani 
(Fig. 21.2). The pars tensa, the lower part of the leaves the descending portion of the facial nerve in 
drum, is formed from an outer layer of skin, a middle the temporal bone to provide taste fibre innervation 
layer of fibrous tissue and an inner layer of middle to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue. The facial 
ear mucosa. It is attached to the annulus, a fibrous nerve supplies the facial muscles through upper and 
ring that stabilizes the drum to the surrounding bone. lower divisions that arise as it passes through the 
The pars flaccida, the upper part of the drum, may parotid gland.



440 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Facial nerve

Footplate of stapes in oval window

Crura of Vestibule 

stapes Semicircular canals, utricle and saccule

Attic of Internal acoustic meatus
middle ear Cochlear nerve

(epitympanic
recess) Vestibular nerve

Facial nerve

Malleus Scala vestibuli

Incus Cochlear duct
containing organ Cochlea

Pinna of Corti
Scala tympani

External Pharynx
auditory
meatus Eustachian tube 

Eardrum
(tympanic Cavity of

membrane) middle ear

Figure 21.1  Anatomy of the ear. 

Head of Incudomalleolar
malleus articulation

Short process
Neck of of incus
malleus

Lateral Body of
process incus

Anterior Long process of incus
process

Incudostapedial
Manubrium articulation
of malleus Posterior

crus
Anterior crus

Footplate of stapes

Figure 21.3  The ossicles. 

branches of the fifth, ninth and tenth cranial nerves, 
Figure 21.2  A normal left tympanic membrane. together with nerves from C2 and C3 roots. Because 

branches of these nerves also supply the larynx and 
Symptoms of ear disease pharynx, as well as the temporomandibular joint and 

teeth, disease of these structures may give rise to 
The five main symptoms of ear disease are: referred pain in the ear. Therefore, if otoscopic 
1	 otalgia: earache or pain. examination is normal, examination of these other 
2	 otorrhoea: discharge. sites should be considered. In half of affected patients, 
3	 hearing loss. the ear pain is referred.
4	 tinnitus: a perception of sound in the absence of The main causes of otalgia are listed in Box 21.1. 

an appropriate auditory stimulus. Of the otological causes, acute infection of the car-
5	 vertigo: an illusion of movement. tilage of the pinna (perichondritis) can be very painful. 

Malignant otitis externa is not neoplastic. It is due 
Otalgia to infection (usually Pseudomonas) and can spread 
Pain from disease of the external ear, tympanic to the skull base, especially in diabetic or immuno-
membrane and middle ear reaches the brain by compromised individuals.



SECTION Three
441

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Superior semicircular canal

Lateral semicircular Brainstem
canal

Scala
vestibuli Greater superficial

petrosal nerve
Scala media

Porus of internal
(Cochlear duct)

auditory canal

Posterior semicircular canal
Organ of
Corti To stapedius muscle

Chorda tympani nerve

Scala tympani
Stylomastoid foramen

Zygomatic
Cochlear

nerve Temporal

Figure 21.4  Section through the cochlea. 
Buccal

Mandibular
Cells of Tectorial Outer Inner Inner
Hensen membrane hair cells hair cell sulcus cells Cervical

Figure 21.6  The course of the peripheral facial nerve. 

Otorrhoea
Pus draining from the ear varies in character depending 
on its origin (Table 21.1). A profuse mucoid discharge 
with pulsation suggests a tympanic membrane perfora-
tion. The length of history is important. Persistent 

Cells of Basement Cells of Outer Tunnel Inner
Claudius membrane Deiters rod of Corti rod Cochlear discharge suggests chronic otitis media with perfora-

nerve tion (Table 21.2). Cholesteatoma usually begins with 
Figure 21.5  The organ of Corti. tympanic membrane retraction and blockage of 

migrating desquamated skin from the drum and 
external meatus. The retraction deepens and infection 
leads to destruction of middle ear structures, some-

Box 21.1  Causes of otalgia times causing damage to the facial nerve or inner ear. 
The infection may spread outside the temporal bone, 

Otological even causing meningitis or intracranial abscess. Bleed-
■	 Acute suppurative otitis media, mastoiditis ing from a chronically discharging ear is usually due 
■	 Acute otitis externa to infection but may rarely indicate malignant change. 
■	 Barotrauma Cranial trauma followed by bleeding and leakage of 
■	 Furunculosis cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) indicates fracture of the 
■	 Perichondritis base of the skull.
■	 Herpes zoster (Ramsay Hunt syndrome – shingles of the 

facial nerve) Hearing loss
■	 Myringitis bullosa – viral myringitis Deafness may be gradual or sudden, bilateral or 
■	 Necrotizing external otitis (malignant otitis externa) unilateral. There may be an obvious precipitating 
■	 Neoplasia cause, such as trauma or noise exposure. There are 
Non-otological two characteristics of hearing loss: to use the analogy 
■	 Tonsillitis or quinsy of a radio, a decrease in volume or a change in the 
■	 Dental disease tuning corresponding to impaired speech discrimina-
■	 Temporomandibular joint pathology tion so that words are not clear even with a hearing 
■	 Cervical spine disease aid. Hearing loss may be conductive, sensorineural 
■	 Carcinoma in the upper air and food passages or mixed, with both conductive and sensorineural 

components (Box 21.2). Conductive deafness is due 



442 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Table 21.1  Characteristics of otorrhoea in relation to site and aetiology
Diagnosis Purulent Mucopurulent Mucoid Serous Watery
Acute otitis externa (OE) ✓✓ ✓ ✓
Chronic OE ✓✓ ✓ ✓✓
Acute suppurative otitis media (SOM) ✓ ✓✓ ✓
Chronic SOM ✓ ✓✓ ✓✓
Cerebrospinal fluid leak ✓ ✓✓

Table 21.2  Classification of chronic otitis media (COM) Box 21.2  Causes of deafness
COM classification Conductive
(synonym) Otoscopic abnormalities ■	 Occluding wax in the external meatus
Healed COM (healed Thinning and/or local or ■	 Middle ear effusion
perforation with or generalized opacification of ■	 Acute suppurative otitis media
without tympanosclerosis) the pars tensa without ■	 Chronic otitis media: perforation, ossicular erosion, 

perforation or retraction cholesteatoma
Inactive mucosal COM Permanent perforation of the ■	 Otosclerosis
(dry perforation) pars tensa but the middle ■	 Trauma to the drum or ossicular chain

ear mucosa is not inflamed ■	 Otitis externa
■

Active mucosal COM Permanent defect of the 	 Congenital atresia of the external meatus or congenital 
(discharging perforation) pars tensa with an inflamed ossicular fixation

■
middle ear mucosa that 	 Carcinoma of the middle ear
produces mucopus which Sensorineural
may discharge ■	 Age-associated hearing loss: presbycusis

Inactive squamous Retraction of the pars ■	 Noise-induced hearing loss
epithelial COM flaccida or pars tensa ■	 Genetic: syndromal or non-syndromal
(retraction) (usually posterosuperior) ■	 Ménière’s disease

which has the potential to ■	 Infective: meningitis, measles, mumps, syphilis
become active with retained ■	 Sudden sensorineural hearing loss (idiopathic)
debris ■	 Perinatal: hypoxia, jaundice

Active squamous Retraction of the pars ■	 Prenatal: rubella
epithelial (cholesteatoma) flaccida or tensa that has ■	 Trauma: head injury, surgery

retained squamous ■	 Ototoxicity: aminoglycosides, diuretics, cytotoxics
epithelial debris and is ■	 Neoplastic: vestibular schwannoma, other 
associated with cerebellopontine angle lesions
inflammation and the 
production of pus, often 
from the adjacent mucosa

notice an apparent difference in the pitch or frequency 
of a tone between the two ears (diplacusis). Most 
hearing loss is gradually progressive and related to 

to disease in the external ear canal, tympanic mem- ageing. Deafness is often secondary to occupational 
brane or middle ear. Characteristically, the patient or social noise exposure and is often inherited. Many 
retains normal speech discrimination. Sensory deafness drugs are ototoxic, and there are associations between 
implies pathology in the cochlea, and neural deafness hereditary hearing loss and neurological and renal 
implies pathology in the cochlear nerve or the central disorders. Occasionally, sensorineural hearing loss 
connections of hearing, but in practice this distinction occurs suddenly. A cause is only rarely identifiable.
is difficult to make and rarely useful, and the term 
sensorineural deafness is used instead. Sensorineural Tinnitus
deafness causes impairment of speech discrimination Tinnitus is a ringing, rushing or hissing sound in the 
with recruitment; the latter is an abnormal perception absence of an appropriate auditory stimulus. It can 
of the increase of intensity of sound with increasing be caused by almost any pathology in the auditory 
signal volume that results from damage to the hair pathways. It is strongly associated with hearing loss, 
cells in the cochlea. This leads to a decreased func- although it occasionally occurs with normal hearing. 
tional dynamic range, so that a small increase in sound It is common, affecting up to 18% of the population 
intensity is uncomfortable. The patient may also of industrialized countries. In a small proportion 



SECTION Three
443

Ear, nose and throat ﻿
(0.5%), daily life is affected. Correction of coexisting a few days. The elderly are less able to compensate. 
depressive illness may be of value. Management of In all age groups, vertigo may cause residual vague 
tinnitus includes the use of hearing aids or masking imbalance, particularly in association with movement 
devices. It usually improves with time, but in most or after alcohol ingestion. It is important to test for 
cases there is no specific treatment. positional changes, as the commonest cause of ves-

tibular vertigo is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
Vertigo (BPPV), secondary to loose debris floating in the 
Vertigo is an illusion of movement such that the posterior semicircular canal.
patient either feels the world moving or has a sensation 
of moving in the world. Patients frequently have Clinical examination of the ear  
difficulty describing the symptom. Higher centre and hearing
dysfunction, as in anxiety states or drug effects, may 
also cause dizziness. There are therefore many causes Pinna and postauricular area
for symptomatic ‘dizziness’ (Box 21.3). A feeling of 
the room spinning associated with nausea or vomiting First, inspect the pinna and the surrounding skin. 
suggests an acute labyrinthine cause, especially if Congenital abnormalities may be associated with 
there are changes in hearing or tinnitus. Fortunately, accessory skin tags, abnormal cartilaginous frag-
most acute vestibular events are self-limiting, because ments in the skin surrounding the ear or small pits 
even if one vestibular system is abnormal, the central and sinuses. Look also for any lymphadenopathy 
connections can ‘reset’ the system over a period of (associated with otis externa or scalp cellulitis) and 

for surgical scars. A hot, tender postaural swelling, 
pushing the pinna forward, suggests mastoid infection 
(Fig. 21.7). Incomplete development of the ear 

Box 21.3  Causes of vertigo
Of sudden onset
■	 Acute viral labyrinthitis
■	 Vestibular neuritis
With focal features
■	 Brainstem ischaemia (transient ischaemic attack)
■	 Multiple sclerosis
■	 Migraine
■	 Temporal lobe epilepsy
With deafness and tinnitus
■	 Ménière’s disease
■	 Vestibular schwannoma
With positional change A

■	 Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)
■	 Cervical vertigo
After trauma
■	 BPPV
■	 Perilymph fistula
With motion
■	 Motion sickness
Drug induced
■	 Vestibulotoxic drugs, e.g. gentamicin, salicylate, 

quinine, antihypertensives
With aural discharge
■	 Middle ear disease
With systemic disorders
■	 Postural hypotension
■	 Syncope
■	 Cardiac dysrhythmia
■	 Carotid sinus hypersensitivity
■	 Anxiety and panic attacks B
■	 Hyperventilation syndrome

Figure 21.7  Acute mastoiditis (A) before and (B) after incision. 



444 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿
(microtia) occurs with narrowing (atresia) of Wax may be removed with a Jobson Horne probe 
the external meatus, but the auricle can also be or wax hook or by syringing with water. Never syringe 
displaced from its normal position (melotia) or if there is a history of previous perforation or discharge. 
pathologically enlarged (macrotia). These abnormali- It is important to use water at 37°C lest vertigo be 
ties may be associated with cysts or infection in a induced by caloric stimulation of the labyrinth. Keratin 
preauricular sinus. debris, pus or mucopus in the meatus can be removed 

and can be sent for microbiology. Foreign bodies in 
External ear canal the ear canal are sometimes found in children; they 
Inspect the external auditory canal using a hand-held may be difficult to remove without a general 
otoscope (Fig. 21.8). To bring the cartilaginous meatus anaesthetic.
into line with the bony canal, retract the pinna 
backwards and upwards. Always use the largest The tympanic membrane
speculum that will comfortably fit the ear canal. Hold The hand-held otoscope is satisfactory for most 
the otoscope like a pen between thumb and index examinations, but the outpatient microscope offers 
finger, with the ulnar border of your hand resting the best view. Be familiar with the variability in 
gently against the side of the patient’s head. In this appearance of the normal drum. The most common 
way, any movement of the patient’s head during the abnormality is tympanosclerosis (Fig. 21.10), which 
examination causes synchronous movement of the consists of white chalky patches in the drum caused 
speculum, limiting any risk of accidental injury to by hyaline degeneration of the fibrous layer due to 
the ear canal. With a young child, sit him on his previous infection. Prolonged negative middle ear 
parent’s lap with the head and shoulder held pressure may cause the drum to become thinned and 
(Fig. 21.9). atelectatic (Fig. 21.11), either diffusely or with a 

retraction pocket. Eustachian tube dysfunction and/
or acute otitis media may cause a middle ear effusion 
(Fig. 21.12). Fluid behind the drum is often obvious, 
but when the drum is opaque, increased vascularity 
or retraction are useful clues. Perforations of the pars 
tensa are either central or marginal (Fig. 21.13). 
Marginal perforations extend to the annulus and may 
be associated with cholesteatoma (Fig. 21.14), whereas 
with central perforations there is a rim of retained 
membrane between the defect and the annulus. Both 
are described by their position in relation to the 
handle of the malleus (anterior, posterior or inferior) 
and by their size (Fig. 21.15).

The fistula test is indicated if the patient is dizzy 
with middle ear pathology. Press on the tragus to 
occlude the meatus and then apply more pressure. 
If the labyrinth is open, this pressure change will be 
applied to the inner ear. The patient will be dizzy 

Figure 21.8  Examining the ear in an adult. and nystagmus may be induced.

Figure 21.9  Examining the ear in a child. 



Figure 21.10  A right tympanic membrane showing marked Figure 21.11  A left tympanic membrane showing atelectasis 
posterior tympanosclerosis and a small anterior perforation. and posterior retraction on to the long process of the incus. 

Figure 21.12  A left tympanic membrane with a middle ear Figure 21.13  A left tympanic membrane with an anterior central 
effusion. perforation. 

Figure 21.14  A left tympanic membrane with cholesteatoma in Figure 21.15  A left tympanic membrane with a subtotal 
the posterosuperior quadrant. perforation. The chorda tympani and long process of the incus can 

clearly be seen, as can the round window niche. 



446 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Table 21.3  The House-Brackmann facial nerve grading tuning fork. Strike the tuning fork and hold it near 
scale the external ear canal with the prongs vibrating 

towards the meatus (air conduction) and then against 
Grade Function the mastoid process (bone conduction). Ask the 
I Normal patient which sound was louder. In subjects with 
II Normal at rest normal hearing and those with sensorineural loss, air 

Slight weakness on close inspection conduction is better than bone conduction (Rinne 
Complete eye closure with minimal effort positive.) In conductive deafness, bone conduction 
Slight asymmetry of mouth with movement is louder (Rinne negative), although patients with a 
Good to moderate forehead movement small conductive loss (up to 30 dB) may remain 

III Normal at rest Rinne positive; it is only when the difference between 
Obvious asymmetry on movement air and bone conduction exceeds 40 dB that the 
Synkinesis ± hemifacial spasm Rinne test is consistently negative. Moreover, patients 
Complete eye closure with effort with a profound unilateral sensorineural hearing loss 
Slight to moderate forehead movement will report a Rinne-negative response if the contra-
Slight weakness of mouth with maximal effort lateral ear has normal or reasonable hearing. This is 

because although the vibrating tuning fork held 
IV Normal at rest adjacent to the test ear will only be heard in that 

Asymmetry on movement is disfiguring ear, the same tuning fork placed on the mastoid 
Incomplete eye closure process will also be heard in the non-test ear. For 
No perceptible forehead movement these reasons, masking (by rubbing) the non-test ear 
Asymmetrical mouth motion with maximal effort should always validate a negative response. If there 

V Asymmetric at rest is doubt, a Barany box should be used to mask the 
Barely noticeable movement contralateral ear.
No forehead movement In the Weber test, the base of the vibrating tuning 
Incomplete eye closure fork is placed firmly on the vertex or forehead in the 
Slight mouth movement with effort midline. With eyes shut, ask the patient whether the 

VI No facial function perceptible sound is heard in the midline or whether it is lateral-
ized. With normal response or with hearing sym-
metrically reduced, the sound is heard in the midline. 

The facial nerve However, when one ear is normal, the noise will be 
Test the facial movements. Unilateral weakness is louder on the side opposite to an ear with pure 
much easier to identify than bilateral weakness. A sensorineural loss and on the same side as an ear with 
peripheral facial palsy can be graded using the House- purely conductive hearing loss. The Weber test is 
Brackmann scale (Table 21.3). Function of the greater simple and quick, but there is a high test-retest vari-
superficial petrosal nerve can be tested with Schirmer’s ability. Because all clinical tests of hearing have limited 
test: absorbent paper strips are applied to the inferior reliability, accurate formal audiometry in the ENT 
margin of the eye to detect tear formation (Ch. 20). clinic is essential.
Chorda tympani function can be tested by the sense 
of taste and by electrogustometry. Clinical assessment of balance
Clinical assessment of hearing The unsteady patient requires a full neuro-otological 

examination. It is also necessary to examine the 
Conversational hearing will indicate any possible cardiovascular system (see Ch. 13). The aim is to 
deafness. The television may be too loud or varying localize the site of any potential lesion and possibly 
amounts of background noise make conversation confirm a diagnosis, although sometimes all that is 
unexpectedly difficult. Establish which is the patient’s possible is to differentiate between central (brainstem) 
better-hearing ear. Test using words or numbers. Stand and peripheral (labyrinthine) lesions.
to the side of the ear to be tested and mask the ■	 Examine the cranial nerves (see Ch. 16), 
non-test ear by gently rubbing the tragus. The test particularly testing the eyes and for nystagmus.
starts with a whispered voice at 60 cm (approximate ■	 Nystagmus (see Ch. 20). The characteristic 
intensity 15 dB) and proceeds with a whispered voice saw-toothed nystagmus of vestibular disease has 
at 15 cm (35 dB). If there is no response, try a a slow (labyrinthine) and a fast (central) 
conversational voice at 60 cm (50 dB); this is then component and is enhanced by movement of 
repeated, if necessary, at 15 cm (55-60 dB) from the the eyes in the direction of the fast phase. Eye 
test ear. With experience, a surprisingly accurate movements can also be assessed using Frenzel’s 
assessment can be made. It is valuable in correlating glasses (Fig. 21.17). These are illuminated and 
the history and results of more formal audiometry. have 20-dioptre lenses that abolish visual 

The Rinne test (Fig. 21.16) compares hearing by fixation for the patient, thereby possibly 
air and bone conduction using a 512- or 256-Hz unmasking nystagmus.



SECTION Three
447

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Normal bilateral hearing or bilateral Right-sided conductive hearing
sensorineural hearing loss loss and normal left ear

BC BC BC BC
+ + +++ +

+++ +++ + +++
AC AC AC AC

 Rinne:  positive bilaterally (AC>BC) Right Rinne: negative (BC>AC)
 Weber:  central  Weber: lateralizes to the ear with conductive loss

Right-sided sensorineural hearing Right-sided severe sensorineural
loss and normal left ear hearing loss or dead ear

BC BC BC BC
+ + +++ +

Noise
masking

++ +++ + +++
AC AC AC AC

 Rinne: positive bilaterally (AC>BC) Right Rinne: negative (BC>AC): a false negative as the 
 Weber:  lateralizes to the ear with greater    BC is heard in the normal left cochlea by
  cochlear function    skull crossover

 Weber:  lateralizes to the ear with greater
   cochlear function

 Rinne test  Weber test (Note: the good ear should be masked and the test
repeated. The right-side BC should be greatly reduced
or absent)

Figure 21.16  Interpretation of tuning fork tests. 

■	 Pursuit (slow) movements, which depend on ■	 Romberg’s test. The patient stands with the feet 
the fovea and the occipital cortex of the brain, together, initially with the eyes open and then 
are seen when the patient tracks an object closed. Patients with disorders of the spinal 
moved slowly horizontally and vertically across posterior columns (impaired position sense) will 
the visual field about 35 cm away. sway or fall with closed eyes but will stand 

■	 Saccadic movements are driven by the frontal normally if eyes are open. Patients with 
lobes and the pontine gaze centres are seen when uncompensated unilateral labyrinthine 
the patient alternates the gaze rapidly between dysfunction are unstable, tending to fall to the 
two objects held approximately 30° apart. side of the lesion. Patients with central 



448 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿
dysfunction sway to both sides, whether the in BPPV involves a variable latent period when 
eyes are open or shut. nothing happens. There is then a torsional 

■	 Unterberger’s stepping test has the patient nystagmus beating to the lower ear, with a 
standing with arms outstretched and eyes closed variable feeling of vertigo. This lasts perhaps 5-30 
and taking steps on the spot. Unilateral seconds. With repetition, the response becomes 
vestibular hypofunction leads to rotation to the less or absent. The condition is caused by debris 
affected side. in the posterior semicircular canal. It is 

■	 Gait assessment. The patient walks heel to toe frequently self-limiting, but if it persists it may 
with eyes first open and then closed. The be cured by the Epley particle repositioning 
patient with a cerebellar lesion is unable to do manoeuvre. Other positive results are possible. 
either. The patient with a peripheral vestibular Persistent immediate positional nystagmus 
lesion will struggle, particularly with the eyes without vertigo implies central pathology.
closed.

■	 The Dix-Hallpike test assesses the effect of Special investigations of hearing
positional change. The patient sits on an 
examination couch. First test neck movements, to Pure tone audiometry
make sure they are free and painless. The head is A single-frequency tone is presented at standardized 
then turned 45° to the side of test. The patient is levels into each ear in turn. This is done in noise-free 
laid back rapidly with his head extended over the surroundings, usually in a soundproofed booth (Fig. 
end of the bed (Fig. 21.18). The classic response 21.19). Air conduction is tested first through 

Figure 21.17  Frenzel’s glasses. Figure 21.18  The Dix-Hallpike test position. 

Figure 21.19  Pure tone audiometry. 



SECTION Three
449

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

0 0

20 20

40 40

60 right air-conduction 60
left air-conduction

80 not-masked bone-conduction 80
right masked bone-conduction

100 left masked bone-conduction 100

110 110

A 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 B 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz)

0 0

20 20

40 40

60 60

80 80

100 100

110 110

C 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 D 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz)

Figure 21.20  Pure tone audiograms: (A) normal; (B) noise-induced hearing loss; (C) presbycusis; (D) bilateral conductive hearing loss. 

headphones. A level well above threshold, as predicted are often unable to achieve 100% ODS and, in 
by free field testing, is chosen and the patient responds particular, patients with neural/retrocochlear loss 
when he hears the sound. The intensity is then reduced have poor ODS (Fig. 21.21).
in 10-dB steps until the patient cannot hear it. It is 
then increased in 5-dB steps to establish the quietest Tympanometry
sound that can be heard – the threshold. The better An earpiece is inserted into the external meatus 
ear is tested first at 1, 2, 4 and 8 kHz, then at 250 through which pass three channels. The first delivers 
and 500 Hz (Fig. 21.20). Bone conduction tests are a continuous tone into the ear canal during the test 
performed using a vibrating headset applied to the (probe tone); the second has a microphone to record 
mastoid. In conductive loss, the difference is called the sound intensity level within the ear canal; the 
the air-bone gap. This may be correctible by surgery third channel connects to a manometer so that the 
to the middle ear and tympanic membrane. pressure within the canal can be altered (Fig. 21.22).

The external meatus is a rigid tube with a compliant 
Speech audiometry end (the drum). Normally the middle ear and ear 
A pure tone audiogram does not test discrimination. canal pressures are equal, and most of the sound 
A speech audiogram measures the patient’s ability introduced into the meatus is transmitted into the 
to recognize words from phonetically balanced lists ear; only a minimum of sound energy is reflected 
delivered at different sound levels to the test ear back and measured by the microphone. Changing 
from a tape recording. The percentage of words the pressure difference between the external and the 
correctly repeated by the subject is noted at each middle ear causes the tympanic membrane to become 
level. With normal hearing, all words are heard (100% less compliant. This increases the sound energy 
optimal speech discrimination – ODS) at a sound reflected back to the probe. These changes are plotted 
intensity of 40 dB. Patients with sensorineural deafness graphically on a tympanogram (Fig. 21.23). The test 

Hearing level (dB) Hearing level (dB)

Hearing level (dB) Hearing level (dB)



450 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

100

80

60

40

20

0

10            20             30            40             50            60             70             80            90            100           110         120
Relative speech level (dB)

SPEECH MATERIAL                          FREE FIELD / EARPHONE

SCORING: PHONEME / WORD / SENTENCE

SPEECH LEVEL              RIGHT %                     LEFT % COMMENTS:

Figure 21.21  Speech audiogram. 

Figure 21.22  A tympanogram being performed. 

Figure 21.23  A tympanogram. 



SECTION Three
451

Ear, nose and throat ﻿
also measures the volume of the canal: a large volume 
indicates a tympanic perforation. Impedance (the 
reciprocal of compliance) is increased when the 
tympanic membrane is thickened or the middle ear 
has fluid and is decreased when the drum is hyper-
mobile or atrophic. Tympanometry is an objective 
test. It has particular value in children in the assess-
ment of glue ear.

Otoacoustic emissions
When a click or tone-burst is played into the ear, a 
very small noise is emitted in return, probably arising 
from the outer hair cells. These emissions are par-
ticularly prominent in neonates but become increas-
ingly difficult to elicit with age. Testing does not 
require cooperation. When there is hearing loss there 
is no response. The technique is valuable in the 
screening of neonates and forms the backbone of the 
Universal Neonatal Hearing Screen programme. Figure 21.24  A computerized caloric test result. 
Evoked-response audiometry
A click presented to the ear causes a nerve impulse 
to be sent to the auditory cortex via the brainstem. 
If a large number (>2000) of responses are averaged, 
then evoked responses in brainstem and cortex can 
be seen and amplitudes and latencies measured. The 
auditory brainstem response is not affected by sedation 
and the main indication is in the establishment of 
hearing thresholds, especially in infants. Cortical-
evoked responses are less widely used. They require 
an awake and alert patient.

Special tests of balance
Caloric testing is the most commonly performed 
routine test of the vestibular end-organ. The patient Figure 21.25  Videonystagmography. 
lies on a couch with the head up 30° in order to 
bring the lateral semicircular canals into the vertical 
plane. With the patient fixing on a point in central 
gaze, each external ear canal is irrigated with water 
at 30°C, and then at 44°C for 30-40 seconds, with 
suitable intervals. Cold water induces nystagmus 
away from the irrigated ear and the opposite for 
warm water (COWS: cold opposite, warm same). The 
induced nystagmus is recorded and analysed using 
electronystagmography (Fig. 21.24). Nystagmus can 
be enhanced by the abolition of optic fixation (see 
Frenzel’s glasses above). The videonystagmoscope 
also allows monitoring of this response (Fig. 21.25) 
and allows recordings to be made. Peripheral lesions 
tend to cause a diminished response on one side (a 
canal paresis). A directional preponderance may be 
due to central disorders, especially in the brainstem.

Radiological examination
Computed tomography (CT) scanning is the investiga-
tion of choice but is not a substitute for clinical 
assessment of chronic ear disease. It is not specifically Figure 21.26  CT scan of left ear showing a fistula of the lateral 
diagnostic of cholesteatoma (Fig. 21.26) but is useful semicircular canal in a patient who had previously undergone a 
in cranial trauma (Fig. 21.27) and in the evaluation mastoidectomy. 



452 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Box 21.4  Functions of the nose
■	 Respiration
■	 Filtration
■	 Heating
■	 Humidification
■	 Smell

Nasal bones

Upper lateral
cartilage

Figure 21.27  CT scan of a right ear showing a fracture across 
the middle ear. The incus is seen and is lying in a displaced Lower lateral
position. cartilage

Figure 21.29  The external nose. 

Perpendicular plate
of the ethmoid

Septal
cartilage

Maxillary
crest Vomer

Figure 21.28  MRI scan demonstrating a large left vestibular 
schwannoma with brainstem compression. Figure 21.30  The nasal septum. 

of temporal bone neoplasia. Magnetic resonance maxilla on each side. The lateral cartilages provide 
imaging (MRI) is more useful in identifying soft tissue support for the nostrils, especially in inspiration (Fig. 
abnormalities in the cerebellopontine angle, especially 21.29). The nasal cavity is divided by the nasal septum, 
vestibular schwannoma (Fig. 21.28). These present formed of cartilage anteriorly and bone posteriorly 
with asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss. MRI also (Fig. 21.30). The lateral wall of the nose is formed 
helps assess tumour spread outside the temporal by the three nasal turbinate bones; inferior, middle 
bone. MR angiography helps in assessment of pulsatile and superior (Fig. 21.31). Under each turbinate is a 
tinnitus and vascular lesions. Formal angiography is corresponding meatus. The nose constantly produces 
useful for embolization of vascular tumours. mucus – a pint a day – which is constantly propelled 

backwards by the cilia to the posterior choanae, 
The nose and paranasal sinuses whence it is swallowed, usually unnoticed.

The paranasal sinuses are air-filled spaces in the 
Anatomy bones of the facial skeleton (Figs 21.31 and 21.32). 

They comprise the paired maxillary, frontal and 
The nose (Box 21.4) is formed by the two nasal ethmoid sinuses and the unpaired but bisected 
bones which articulate with the nasal process of the sphenoid sinus, and form the structure of the adult 



SECTION Three
453

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Frontal sinus palatine tonsils. These are largest in childhood and 
regress from the age of about 8 years onwards, 

Sphenoidal sinus although rarely they may persist into adult life. The 
Adenoids inferior opening of the Eustachian tube is on the 

Turbinates lateral wall of the postnasal space.

Symptoms of nasal disease
Eustachian

tube The important symptoms of nasal and sinus disease 
are:
■

Hard palate 	 nasal blockage
■	 rhinorrhoea – nasal discharge

Soft palate
■	 epistaxis (nasal bleeding)

Tongue ■	 sneezing and itching
Tonsils ■	 disturbances of smell

■	 facial pain.
Figure 21.31  The lateral wall of the nose. General features

Orbital and facial pain, proptosis, diplopia, periorbital 
swelling and conjunctival chemosis may develop if 
infection or neoplasia spread outside the sinuses. 
Pathology in the postnasal space may lead to 
otological symptoms secondary to Eustachian tube 

Frontal involvement.
sinus

Ethmoid
sinus Nasal blockage

Unilateral or bilateral blockage of the nose is common. 
Septum Maximum resistance to airflow occurs at the front 

of the nose near the inferior turbinate. In the nasal 
cycle (2-6 hours long), one side is congested and one 

Maxillary side decongested at any one time. The commonest 
sinus cause of nasal blockage is allergic rhinitis. A constant 

blockage suggests a structural abnormality (deviated 
nasal septum, nasal polyposis, adenoidal hypertrophy 
(children)).

Figure 21.32  Cross-section through the sinuses Rhinorrhoea
(semischematic). Nasal discharge may be mucoid, purulent or watery. 

It may contain blood. A purulent discharge suggests 
face. The ethmoidal cells or labyrinth comprises a infection, either in the nose or in the sinus. In a child, 
number of small bony cells. The sinuses open into unilateral discharge may be due to a foreign body 
the nose via small drainage channels (ostia). Their retained in the nose. Mucoid discharge is more sug-
mucus is swept by cilia through the ostia to be mixed gestive of allergic rhinitis. Watery discharge is indica-
with mucus secreted by the nose. The middle meatus tive of vasomotor rhinitis. CSF leak is a rare but 
is the common pathway for drainage from the maxil- important cause; the discharge is clear, watery and 
lary, the anterior ethmoid and the frontal sinuses. salty tasting. Epistaxis (a nose bleed) varies in severity 
The anterior ethmoids are important because disease from a minor intermittent problem to a life-threatening 
in these areas will compromise maxillary and frontal major haemorrhage that may require cautery. It tends 
sinus drainage. Blockage of the ostia due to inflam- to occur in children and the elderly. The arterial 
mation in the nose, with retention of mucus and supply of the nose is from branches of the spheno-
secondary infection, is the presumed mechanism for palatine artery (external carotid), and from the 
sinus infection (rhinosinusitis). The upper teeth are anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries (internal 
closely related to the floor of the maxillary sinus; carotid). These vessels anastomose in the anterior 
infection here may lead to sinus problems. nasal septum, the site of most epistaxes. Epistaxis is 

The olfactory neuroepithelium of the nose is located associated with hypertension, trauma (including 
in the roof of the nasal cavity. Neurons run through nose-picking), rhinitis and bleeding disorders.
the cribriform plate to the olfactory bulb lying on 
the floor of the anterior cranial fossa. The postnasal Itching and sneezing
space contains the adenoids, which are lymphoid Sneezing is a protective expulsive reflex that helps 
tissue, part of Waldeyer’s ring, which includes the clear the nasal airway of irritants. Paroxysmal sneezing, 



454 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿
associated with rhinorrhoea, nasal obstruction and 
palatal and conjunctival itching, occurs with allergic 
rhinitis.

Disturbances of smell
Loss of smell (anosmia) or impaired sense of smell 
is most often due to nasal obstruction, for example 
with nasal polyposis or allergic rhinitis. It also follows 
damage to nerve fibres passing through the cribriform 
plate after craniofacial trauma. Rarely, viral infection 
may cause permanent anosmia. Cacosmia is an 
unpleasant smell, usually unnoticed by the patient, 
caused by chronic anaerobic sepsis in the nose. A

Facial pain
Pain in the face is very common, but pain limited to 
the nose is rare. Pain centred over a sinus may indicate 
infection or, rarely, a malignancy. There are many 
causes of facial pain. Some, such as cluster headache 
(causing transient nasal blockage and rhinorrhoea) 
and trigeminal neuralgia, are functional disorders, 
with well-defined features (see Ch. 16). Structural 
disorders, such as infection or tumour involving facial 
structures, may also present with facial pain. Investiga-
tion should usually include imaging by CT or MRI.

Other symptoms B
Always enquire about any history of allergy. Most 
people are aware of hay fever but house dust mite Figure 21.33  Examining the nose. 
allergy is also common.

Examination of the nose and face
Inspect the nose and face from the front, side and 
back in a good light. Note the colour of the skin and 
any asymmetry of facial contours. Observe for scars 
and pigmentary changes. With age, the tip of the nose 
tends to droop. Deformities of the nasal bone and 
cartilage, such as saddle deformity, often follow a 
nasal fracture or other destructive disorders of the 
bony or cartilaginous septum. Palpate the nose and 
facial skeleton, especially the orbital margins, noting 
tenderness and any swelling, expansion or depression 
of bone. Facial swelling is unusual in maxillary sinusitis, 
but occurs with dental root infections and in carci-
noma of the maxillary antrum. Inspect and palpate 
the palate and alveoli from inside the mouth using Figure 21.34  A septal perforation. 
a gloved finger.

Examine the nasal vestibule and intranasal contents on the nasal septum and for any perforation (Fig. 
by gently pushing the tip of the nose upwards with 21.34). Perforations may be secondary to cocaine 
a finger, preferably using reflected illumination from snorting, digital trauma (nose-picking), surgical trauma, 
a head mirror. The nasal vestibule is lined with skin granulomatous conditions or inhalation of industrial 
and contains vibrissae (thicker hairs); these become dusts, notably nickel and chrome.
prominent in older men. Inspect the anterior nasal Nasal polyps are usually easily identifiable by their 
cavity with Thudicum’s nasal speculum or an otoscope pale colour (Fig. 21.35) and their softness and lack of 
(Fig. 21.33). The nasal septum is rarely completely sensitivity to probing. In a child, an apparent polyp 
straight but should not be so bent that it is not possible may be seen arising from the roof of the nose; this 
to see the anterior end of the inferior turbinate. The should not be probed as it may be the intranasal 
majority of nasal resistance to airflow occurs in the presentation of a meningocele. In children and adults, 
front of the nose. Look for any area of granulation airflow through a patent nostril causes misting on a 



SECTION Three
455

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Figure 21.35  A large polyp in the right nasal cavity. 

Figure 21.37  Endoscopic view of the Eustachian tube orifice and 
the postnasal space. 

Box 21.5  Common inhalant allergens
■	 House dust and house dust mite
■	 Grass pollen
■	 Tree pollen
■	 Weed pollen
■	 Animal dander: cat, dog, rabbit
■	 Feathers
■	 Moulds

Figure 21.36  Rigid nasal endoscopy. 

cold metal tongue depressor or mirror held at the that have been suspected from the history, should be 
nose. In a neonate, nasal patency is best estimated tested and compared to positive and negative controls 
by observing any movement of a wisp of cotton (histamine and saline). Unfortunately, however, a 
wool held in front of each nostril after blocking negative response does not definitely exclude atopy. 
each in turn with the thumb. Nasal endoscopy (Fig. If clinical suspicion is strong, the radioallergosorbent 
21.36), after applying a topical decongestant such test (RAST), which measures specific IgE in blood, 
as xylometazoline with topical lidocaine anaesthesia, may be considered, although it is expensive. Nasal 
allows inspection of the middle meatus for oedema, provocation tests are time consuming, as only one 
draining pus or polyps. The postnasal space and the allergen at a time can be tested.
opening of the Eustachian tube (Fig. 21.37) can be 
seen, with the fossa of Rosenmuller, the site of origin Nasal patency
of postnasal space carcinomas, lying directly above Objective assessment of nasal patency is difficult. 
and behind. In children and young adults, look for Rhinomanometry, which measures nasal airflow and 
adenoidal swelling. resistance, and acoustic rhinometry, which measures 

nasal volume and cross-sectional area, remain special-
Special tests ized research tools.

Allergy testing Mucociliary clearance
If allergic symptoms are severe, there is merit in Mucociliary clearance is a test of impaired ciliary 
confirming extrinsic allergy by skin-prick testing (see function used, for example, in Kartagener’s syndrome 
Ch. 19). An important component of treating allergy of impaired ciliary motility. A strong, sweet taste such 
is allergen avoidance, and certainty of responsible as saccharin placed on the anterior end of the inferior 
allergens may encourage compliance. The common turbinate should be tasted in the mouth about 20 
inhalant allergens (Box 21.5), together with any agents minutes later.



456 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Radiological examination to overdiagnose and interpretation requires caution. 
Plain X-rays are unreliable in the management of It does have value in assessing spread of sinus 
sinus disease but may be helpful in the absence of neoplasia.
more specialized tests. A lateral X-ray may be useful 
in estimating the degree of adenoidal hypertrophy 
in young children (Fig. 21.38). Endoscopic nasal The throat
examination and CT scanning are the investigations 
of choice for sinus disease (Fig. 21.39). CT is useful Anatomy
in the management of chronic infection, trauma and 
neoplasia. However, there is a radiation dosage to the The throat includes the oral cavity, the pharynx 
eyes, and the investigation should be used only when (oropharynx, nasopharynx and hypopharynx), the 
the diagnosis is uncertain or to provide accurate larynx and the major salivary glands. The oral cavity 
anatomical information before surgery. MRI is less extends from the lips to the anterior faucial pillars. 
useful in sinus disease because of difficulties in The oral cavity proper is bounded by the teeth later-
interpretation. MRI is highly sensitive to changes in ally, the tongue and floor of the mouth inferiorly and 
the mucosal lining of the sinuses. However, it tends the hard and soft palate superiorly. The pharynx 

extends from the base of the skull to the cricopharyn-
geal sphincter (Fig. 21.40). The oropharynx is bounded 
above by the soft palate and below by the upper 
surface of the epiglottis. Its anterior margin is defined 
laterally by the anterior faucial pillar, containing the 
palatoglossus muscle, and by the posterior third of 
the tongue. The posterior pharyngeal wall is its 
posterior boundary. The palatine tonsils are situated 
laterally between the anterior and posterior pillars 
of the fauces. The base of the tongue contains the 
lingual tonsils. This lymphoid tissue, together with 
the adenoids and the tubal tonsil (lymphoid tissue 
around the Eustachian tube opening), makes up 
Waldeyer’s ring, an important line of immunological 
defence. The hypopharynx consists of the posterior 
pharyngeal wall, the piriform fossae and the postcri-
coid area. The piriform fossae, which comprise the 
lateral walls of the pharynx adjacent to the larynx, 
are the routes by which food is passed into the upper 

Figure 21.38  Lateral X-ray of the nasopharynx demonstrating oesophagus. The larynx is a rigid structure consisting 
adenoidal hypertrophy (arrow). of cartilages, the most prominent of which are the 

paired thyroid cartilages, which articulate with the 
cricoid cartilage below. The epiglottis is attached to 
the inner surface of the thyroid cartilage and aids 
the separation of air and food passages during swal-
lowing. The larynx consists of three compartments 
(Fig. 21.41): glottis, supraglottis and subglottis. The 
glottis is formed by the vocal folds. The glottis has 
poor lymphatic drainage, which may help to delay 
the spread of malignancy from this area. The epiglottis 
extends from the false cords below to the hyoid bone 
above. It has a rich lymphatic drainage, and therefore 
malignancy in this area is more frequently associated 
with metastatic disease. The subglottis is the narrowest 
part of the upper respiratory tract and extends from 
the glottis to the lower border of the cricoid.

The prime function of the larynx is to separate 
breathing and swallowing, thereby protecting the 
airway. Voice production is a secondary function that 
has arisen with evolution. Phonation occurs with 
movement of the vocal folds into the midline (Fig. 
21.42). Changes in volume of the voice are caused 

Figure 21.39  Coronal CT scan of the nose showing an opaque by alterations in the subglottic pressure, whereas 
right maxillary antrum and anterior ethmoid cells. alterations in pitch are due to modification of the 



SECTION Three
457

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Torus tubarius

Pharyngeal tonsil

Pharyngeal recess
Nasal cavity

A
Torus levatorius (fold overlying
levator veli palatini)

Fold overlying palatopharyngeal sphincter

B Salpingopharyngeal fold

Tongue Palatine tonsil

Lingual tonsils  Palatopharyngeal arch (overlies
 palatopharyngeus muscle)

 Laryngeal inlet
C

 
Vallecula  

 Oesophagus

A Nasopharynx Trachea  

B Oropharynx  

C Laryngopharynx

Figure 21.40  Midline sagittal section demonstrating the pharynx. 

Epiglottis length and tension of the vocal folds. The quality of 
Piriform fossa this basic laryngeal sound is modulated by resonance 

Hyoid in the pharynx, air sinuses, mouth and nose.
The pharynx is innervated from the pharyngeal 

Supraglottis plexus (cranial nerves IX, X and XI). Interruption 
of this nerve supply by lesions at the jugular foramen 
leads to swallowing problems and severe morbidity. 

Glottis All the muscles of the larynx except the cricothyroid 
Thyroid are supplied by the recurrent laryngeal branch of the 

Subglottis vagus (cranial nerve X). In the chest, this nerve loops 
Cricoid around the arch of the aorta on the left and the 

subclavian artery on the right, before running 
Tracheal Ventricular up to enter the larynx. The long course of the left 
rings (laryngeal) recurrent laryngeal nerve means it is more frequently 
Trachea sinuses affected by disease. The cricothyroid is supplied by 

the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve 
Figure 21.41  The divisions of the larynx. (cranial nerve X).

There are three paired major salivary glands (Fig. 
21.43). The parotid gland lies anterior to the ear. Its 
duct opens opposite the second upper molar tooth. 

Cartilages

Transglottic region



458 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿
Vestibular fold

Vocal cords iglottis Rima
Palatine (False cord) Ep

(True cords)   glottidis
tonsil Cuneiform Aryepiglottic

tubercle fold
Corniculate Vocal

tubercle process
Interarytenoid Trachea

notch Oesophagus
Phonation Inspiration Deep inspiration

Arytenoid
cartilage

Vocal lig Cricoid
(True cord) cartilage

Thyroid
cartilage

Figure 21.42  The mechanism of phonation. 

Post- Preauricular
auricular

Upper
cervical

Posterior
triangle

Submental
Parotid gland

Sublingual Supra- Submandibular
gland Submandibular gland clavicular

Pretracheal

Middle cervical

Lower cervical
Figure 21.43  The major salivary glands. 

Figure 21.44  The cervical lymph node groupings. 
The submandibular gland lies far posterior in the 
floor of the mouth and may be palpated in the neck, 
under the mandible. Its duct opens anteriorly in the 

■
floor of the mouth adjacent to the frenulum of the 	 stridor, or stertorous (noisy) breathing

■
tongue. The smaller sublingual gland lies anteriorly 	 dysphonia (hoarseness)

■
in the floor of the mouth and its duct joins the 	 dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing)

■
submandibular duct. 	 a mass in the neck.

The lymph nodes of the head and neck (Fig. 21.44) Occasionally lesions in the upper airway may present 
provide a barrier to the spread of disease, whether with overspill of food and fluids into the upper trachea 
inflammatory or neoplastic. Enlargement implies that or nose or with weight loss. Malignant mouth, throat 
there is either primary disease within the nodes or and airway disease is very strongly associated with 
that they have become involved secondary to pathol- smoking, with alcohol intake an important synergistic 
ogy in the areas they drain. Occasionally they may factor.
become involved by pathology below the clavicle. Oral ulceration and pain
Symptoms of throat disease An ulcer is the commonest oral lesion. Traumatic 

ulcers heal quickly although, if due to ill-fitting 
Patients with throat disorders present with: dentures or broken teeth, will rapidly recur, if not 
■	 pain fail to heal. Aphthous ulcers are small, painful 
■	 ulceration superficial ulcers of the tongue, buccal mucosa and 



SECTION Three
459

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Box 21.6  Causes of a burning sensation in the mouth Box 21.7  Causes of stridor
■	 Deficiency states: Neonatal

–	 iron deficiency ■	 Congenital tumours and cysts
–	 vitamin B12 deficiency ■	 Laryngomalacia
–	 folate deficiency ■	 Subglottic stenosis

■	 Infection: Children
–	 candidiasis

■	 Supraglottitis (epiglottitis)
■	 Diabetes mellitus

■	 Laryngotracheobronchitis
■	 Erythema migrans

■	 Acute laryngitis
■	 Psychogenic:

■
–	 anxiety 	 Foreign body

■
–	 depression 	 Retropharyngeal abscess

■
–	 cancer phobia 	 Papillomatosis

Adults
■	 Acute laryngitis
■	 Laryngeal trauma

palate, of uncertain cause which are painful but ■	 Laryngeal carcinoma
generally heal quickly. There is a high incidence of ■	 Supraglottitis (epiglottitis)
recurrence. Oral carcinoma may present as an ulcer 
and is frequently painless. Sometimes there will be 
other symptoms such as bleeding, loose teeth or 
halitosis but suspicious non-resolving lesions need to 
be biopsied. Thrush (fungal infection with Candida is noisy breathing at the oropharyngeal level and is 
albicans) is a frequent cause of white patches or pain. nearly always caused by adenotonsillar hypertrophy. 
Rare causes of ulceration include Crohn’s disease and Epiglottitis is particularly important in infants and 
Behçet’s syndrome. The sensation of ‘burning mouth’ small children up to the age of 7 years. It is associated 
has a number of causes outlined in Box 21.6. with infection by Haemophilus influenzae type B, and 

may present with rapidly progressive airway obstruc-
Sore throat tion and dyspnoea, fever, pharyngeal pain and drooling. 
A sore throat is one of the commonest of all symp- Vaccination has reduced its incidence. Immediate 
toms. Viral pharyngitis is the most common cause. antibiotic therapy may need to be supplemented by 
Tonsillar inflammation is also common. Acute follicular intubation or even tracheostomy. In adults, laryngeal 
tonsillitis begins with local redness, developing into carcinoma may cause stridor owing to direct blockage 
a punctate or confluent yellow exudate on the tonsils, of the airway, to fixation of the vocal fold or with 
often due to group A Streptococcus infection. In recurrent laryngeal nerve involvement. Croup, acute 
glandular fever (Epstein-Barr virus infection), the laryngotracheobronchitis in young children, causes 
tonsils are covered with a white membrane with less severe airway obstruction. The thick tenacious 
palatal petechiae. A grey membrane is the classic secretions are relieved by air humidification.
feature of the now-rare infection with Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae. A throat swab for culture and sensitivity Dysphonia
is a useful test. Find out the frequency and severity Dysphonia or hoarseness covers a range of symptoms, 
of attacks of tonsillitis, as estimated by the amount from subtle changes noticed by professional voice 
of time lost from school or work, and any antibiotic users to aphonia, when there is no voice. It may be 
treatment; such considerations help to decide whether caused by structural problems affecting the vocal 
tonsillectomy is merited. Generally in children, at fold or by neurological disease (Box 21.8). Hoarseness 
least four attacks a year for 2 years is the minimum followed by increasing airway obstruction is the 
indication for tonsillectomy. typical presentation of a laryngeal neoplasm (Fig. 

An abscess adjacent to the tonsil (quinsy) is very 21.45). Damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve 
painful, causing dysphagia and trismus (spasm in the anywhere along its course usually leads to hoarseness, 
lower jaw). Surgical drainage is usually required. although compensation from the unaffected side will 
Squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsil is also often limit symptoms. A lesion of the vagus above the exit 
painful. It presents as an exophytic mass or ulcer. In of the superior laryngeal nerve produces a more 
the early stages, diagnosis is difficult. Ulceration in breathy voice, as there is also loss of cricothyroid 
the oropharynx also occurs in glandular fever, rubella function. Acute vocal abuse and acute inflammation 
and streptococcal tonsillitis. cause dysphonia, which is usually self-limiting. Long-

term vocal abuse may lead to a number of changes 
Stridor and stertor of the vocal folds: singer’s nodules, polyps (Fig. 21.46) 
Stridor is noisy breathing associated with upper airway or Reinke’s oedema. These will often respond to 
obstruction at the laryngeal level (Box 21.7). Stertor speech therapy, although surgery may be necessary. 



460 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Box 21.8  Causes of dysphonia Box 21.9  Causes of dysphagia
Inflammatory ■	 Neuromuscular: motor neuron disease, multiple 
■	 Acute and chronic laryngitis sclerosis, myasthenia gravis
■	 Smoke inhalation ■	 Intrinsic lesions: oesophageal stricture, oesophageal 
Neoplasia web, achalasia, pharyngeal pouch, pharyngeal and 

oesophageal neoplasia
■	 Carcinoma

■	 Extrinsic lesions: thyroid enlargement, primary or 
■	 Laryngeal papillomatosis secondary neoplasia, aortic aneurysm
Recurrent laryngeal nerve ■	 Systemic: scleroderma
■	 Post thyroidectomy ■	 Psychosomatic: globus pharyngeus
■	 Carcinoma of lung/breast
Neurological
■	 Myasthenia gravis
■	 Spasmodic dysphonia Box 21.10  Salivary gland enlargement
■	 Systemic: hypothyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis ■	 Bacterial infection: acute usually unilateral painful 
Habitual dysphonias swelling (sialadenitis)
■	 Reinke’s oedema ■	 Viral infection: mumps; painful bilateral swelling  
■	 Singer’s nodules and rash
■	 Vocal cord polyps ■	 Obstruction by stone: calculus; variable swelling  
■	 Vocal process granuloma and pain

■
Gastro-oesophageal/laryngopharyngeal reflux 	 Salivary tumour: gradual increase in size

Psychogenic
■	 Musculoskeletal tension
■	 Ventricular
■	 Dysphonia
■	 Conversion disorders
■	 Mutational falsetto (pubophonia)

Figure 21.46  A traumatic right vocal cord polyp. 

may cause dysphagia (Box 21.9). Dysphagia results 
from structural disease of the pharyngo-oesophagus 
or from neurological disorders. Persistent dysphagia, 
especially if associated with regurgitation of undigested 

Figure 21.45  Laryngeal carcinoma at the anterior commissure food, weight loss, dysphonia, otalgia or a mass in the 
with hyperkeratosis of the right vocal cord. neck, requires urgent investigation. Pooling of saliva 

in the piriform fossa seen at laryngoscopy implies 
obstruction in the cervical oesophagus or in the 

It is also worth considering whether gastro-oesophageal postcricoid area (see Ch. 14 for discussion of dysphagia 
(laryngopharyngeal) reflux may be implicated. below the cricopharyngeus).
Malignancy should be considered in any patient with 
dysphonia of more than 4 weeks’ duration. Lump in the neck

The causes of salivary gland swelling are outlined in 
Dysphagia Box 21.10.
Any lesion that interrupts the normal sequence of The neck has a rich lymphatic system of nodes and 
coordinated muscular activity necessary for swallowing channels that drain the head and neck (see Fig. 21.44). 



SECTION Three
461

Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Box 21.11  Causes of neck lumps by age (these groupings 
are not exclusive)

Less than 20 years
■	 Inflammatory/infective lymph nodes
■	 Thyroglossal and branchial cysts, midline dermoid, 

cystic hygroma
■	 Lymphoma
20-40 years
■	 Salivary gland pathology: calculus, infection, tumour
■	 Thyroid pathology: goitre, inflammatory thyroiditis, 

tumour
■	 Chronic infection: HIV, tuberculosis, actinomycosis
■	 Lymphoma
Over 40 years Figure 21.47  Indirect laryngoscopy. 
■	 Secondary malignancy
■	 Primary malignancy: lymphoma If salivary gland pathology is suspected, bimanual 
■	 Thyroid pathology: goitre, tumour palpation, with one gloved finger in the mouth and 

synchronous palpation of the gland, may help to 
define pathology. Palpation is also valuable for examin-
ing the cheeks, tongue and even the tonsils on 

The deep cervical lymph nodes run in the carotid occasion. Tongue mobility (cranial nerve XII) should 
sheath. The most prominent of these is the jugulodi- be assessed by protrusion and side-to-side movement. 
gastric node, which can be palpated just posterior to Look for wasting or fasciculation. Depress the tongue 
the angle of the mandible and anterior to the anterior to inspect the tonsillar pillars, the palatine tonsils, 
edge of sternomastoid. This is the most commonly soft palate and uvula. The tonsils and soft palate 
enlarged node in upper respiratory tract infections, should be nearly symmetrical. Check the gag reflex 
especially following tonsillitis. The commonest mass (cranial nerve IX). The more distant portions of the 
in the neck is a lymph node following infection, pharynx can be inspected only with a laryngeal mirror 
especially in children. Tuberculosis and atypical or fibreoptic laryngoscope. For indirect laryngoscopy 
mycobacterial infection should always be considered (Fig. 21.47), remove any dentures; gently hold the 
with persistent cervical lymphadenopathy. The protruded tongue and ask the patient to take slow 
diagnosis of a neck lump is partly suggested by the deep breaths. With the mouth opened wide, a warmed 
age of the patient (Box 21.11). Features that suggest or demisted laryngeal mirror is introduced gently but 
malignancy are progressive enlargement, hardness, firmly to the soft palate. Displace the soft palate 
lack of tenderness, fixation to deep structures and upwards and backwards with the mirror and instruct 
size (a node more than 1 cm in diameter is more the patient to say ‘ee’ or ‘ah’. The larynx elevates 
likely to be malignant). Ultrasound is a valuable towards the examining mirror. The vallecula, epiglottis, 
investigation, particularly combined with fine needle supraglottis and glottis are examined in turn. The 
aspiration cytology. whole length of each vocal fold should be clearly 

visible and the mobility of each side noted. Vision 
Examination of the mouth and throat can be helped in the gagging patient by using a 2% 

lidocaine anaesthetic spray. If an inadequate view is 
With practice it is possible to inspect all of the oral obtained (this depends upon the skill of the examiner), 
cavity, the pharynx and the larynx. Use a headlight the flexible fibreoptic nasal endoscope (Fig. 21.48) 
or a head mirror to ensure adequate illumination and allows a good view in almost every case. If available, 
keep both hands free for the manipulation of instru- the flexible endoscopic examination is mostly used 
ments. First check the lips, teeth and gums, the floor due to its superior view and for recording the examina-
of the mouth and the openings of the submandibular tion for clinical review. Videolaryngostroboscopy (Fig. 
and parotid ducts. Observe the corners of the mouth 21.49) is a specialized endoscopic examination, useful 
for cracks or fissures (angular stomatitis or cheilitis). for detailed visualization of the vocal folds. In this 
In children, this is usually due to bacterial infection, technique, stroboscopic light is used through the 
but poor dentition in the elderly leads to cracks and endoscope to visualize the mucosal wave of the vocal 
candidiasis (thrush). This may also be seen in severe fold and heighten diagnostic capabilities.
iron-deficiency anaemia and in vitamin B2 (riboflavin) 
deficiency. Grouped vesicles on the lips on a red base Examination of the neck
with crusted lesions are seen in herpes simplex labialis. 
This viral infection is acute and the lack of induration Examination of the neck is part of the routine assess-
and ulceration serves to distinguish it from malignancy. ment of any patient with suspected or proven disease 



462 21 Ear, nose and throat ﻿

Figure 21.48  Flexible fibreoptic nasendoscopy. Figure 21.50  Examination of the neck. 

A

Figure 21.51  Thyroglossal cyst. 

pass up the jugular vein, where the most important 
groups of nodes in the head and neck are situated, 
towards the ear. The jugular, parotid and preauricular 
areas are then examined, followed by submandibular 
and submental nodes. Finally, the nodes associated 
with the anterior jugular chain are examined. This 
brings the fingers to the thyroid gland (details of 
thyroid examination are in Ch. 18). Midline lumps 
should also be assessed with the patient protruding 
the tongue. Movement suggests attachment to the 

B base of the tongue and implies the presence of a 
thyroglossal cyst (Fig. 21.51). The larynx should be 

Figure 21.49  (A) Videolaryngostroboscopy and (B) the image. mobile from side to side, and if the thyroid cartilage 
is held between thumb and first finger and gently 
moved against the cervical spine, it should grate. This 

in the throat. The neck is exposed and inspected laryngeal crepitus is a normal phenomenon. It may 
from the front and side before the examiner stands be reduced or abolished by hypopharyngeal pathology 
behind the patient (Fig. 21.50) and follows a well- or a mass in the prevertebral space displacing the 
rehearsed routine so that no area is missed. Start by larynx away from the cervical spine. Finally, auscultate 
palpating the nodes in the posterior auricular region the carotid arteries and the thyroid gland.
and then progressively feel for the nodes on the 
anterior border of the trapezius muscle down to the Tissue sampling
supraclavicular fossa. The latter area is palpated Fine-needle aspiration cytology is useful in virtually 
forwards from behind. The examining fingers then all neck lumps. If correctly performed, this will 



SECTION Three
463

Ear, nose and throat ﻿
diagnose the vast majority of metastatic squamous 
carcinomas. It is less accurate in distinguishing 
lymphoma from reactive changes. If doubt remains, 
then core or excision biopsy should be performed. 
Accessible lesions in the oral cavity and oropharynx 
may be biopsied in the clinic with either topical 
anaesthesia or a local anaesthetic injection (usually 
with lidocaine).

Radiological examination
A soft-tissue lateral neck X-ray is not a sensitive 
investigation, even for detecting foreign bodies. A 
barium swallow is a dynamic investigation and can 
locate obstruction in the oesophagus or demonstrate 
incoordinate swallowing. It can be combined with 
video recording (videofluoroscopy). It is less helpful 
in evaluating the hypopharynx, where endoscopy 
under a general anaesthetic is the preferred investiga-
tion. Endoscopy is also helpful in taking biopsies in 
suspected malignancy. Ultrasound is useful for the 
evaluation of neck masses and the thyroid gland. 

Figure 21.52  CT scan of neck demonstrating a large metastatic 
lymph node with central necrosis. Doppler ultrasound assesses the cervical vasculature. 

CT scanning helps to stage neoplastic disease and 
may demonstrate metastatic spread that has eluded 
palpation (Fig. 21.52). MRI complements CT as an 
imaging technique.



This page intentionally left blank



Index

Page numbers followed by ‘f ’ indicate Acromegaly  384, 384f, 390 Alopecia  408–409, 408b
figures, ‘t’ indicate tables, and ‘b’ Acromioclavicular joint pain  291–292 traction  408–409, 409f
indicate boxes. Activated rigidity  329 Alopecia totalis  408–409, 409f

Activities of daily living (ADL)  88, Alternating-pressure air mattress 
88t (APAM)  94–95, 95f

A Acute abdomen  260–262 Alveolar ventilation  181
examination  262 Amblyopia  433–434

Abbreviated mental test (AMT)  95b history of  260–262 Ambulatory (Holter) ECG 
Abdomen Acute anterior infarction  210f monitoring  211

children and adolescents, Acute coronary syndromes Amenorrhoea  383
examination of  67–68, 67f (ACS)  191, 191b, 209–210 Amnesia  349, 350t

diffuse enlargement of  256f Acute headache Amniocentesis  60–61
newborn, examination of  81 cause of  31–32 A-mode ultrasound  434–435
palpation  67–68 emergency presentation  136–137, Amsler grid  436, 436f
skin and surface of  248–249 136t Anaemia

Abdominal distension  242 Acute inferolateral infarction  210f cardiac patients  195
on children and adolescents  67–68, Acute meningitis, fever and  148 in inflammatory disease  300b

68b Acute myocardial infarction  209, 209f Anaesthetic history, past, in 
endocrine disorders and  383 Acute nephritic syndrome  360 gynaecological history  48

Abdominal examination Acute pancreatitis  402 Anal itch  371
in gynaecological examination  48– Acute quadriparesis  137–138 Analgesic drugs  163, 163f

49, 49f Acute renal failure  359 Anaphylactic shock, emergency 
for older people  91 Acute-phase reactants presentation  128t, 129–130
palpation in  55, 56f (APRs)  153–154 Androgens
in pregnancy  54–56, 55b Adamantinoma  303f and hair growth, excessive  383

Abdominal fluids, examination Addison’s disease  385–386 in pubertal development  387–388
of  262–264 Adductor, tendon reflexes of  335t Angina  190–191, 190b

faeces  263–264 Adie’s tonic pupil  422–423 stable, ECG  206
peritoneal fluid  264, 265f Adolescents. see Children and unstable  209, 209f
vomit  262–263 adolescents Angiography

Abdominal incisions  248, 248f Adrenocorticotrophic hormone, coronary. see Coronary angiography
Abdominal masses hypersecretion of  385–386, of gastrointestinal arteries  267

palpability  254–255 385f pulmonary  234
percussion  255 Adult onset Still’s disease (AOSD), Angle-closure glaucoma, risk factors 

Abdominal movement, in fever and  149 for  425b
breathlessness  124–125 Advocates  12 Angry patients  10–11

Abdominal pain  242, 243b Afferent defects, of pupil  423 Angular stomatitis  16
acute, emergency presentation  138– Afferent pupillary defect  316 Anisocoria  317, 422–423, 424b

139, 138t Age, definition of  85 Ankle  296–297, 298f
Abdominal palpation  358 see also Older people tendon reflexes of  335t
Abdominal reflexes  335–336 Agnosia  351 testing muscle power of  332t–333t
Abdominal swelling, marked  256b tactile  343 Ankle-brachial pressure index 
Abdominal wall Air hunger  126–127 (ABPI)  89–90

movements of  247–248 Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Ankylosing spondylitis  290, 290f,  
pigmentation of  249 Disability and Exposure of 306f
prominent veins  249, 249f patient (ABCD and E)  121 Anogenital ulceration  371, 371f

Abducens (VI) nerve  317–322, Airway obstruction, emergency Anorexia  242
317f–318f, 318t, 320t presentation  126, 126f Anorexia nervosa  379

Abnormal stools, examination of  263 Albinism  403 Anosmia  313–314, 454
Abortion Alcohol, odour on breath  19 Anterior spinal artery syndrome  347t

obstetric history taking and  54 Alcohol abuse, cardiovascular system Anterior spinal artery territory spinal 
past obstetric history and  47 and  189 cord infarction  349

Abscess, pneumonic consolidation Alcohol history  9, 10b Antibiotics, in fever  146–147
and  221 in gynaecological/obstetric Antibody testing, for sexually 

Abstraction, in psychiatric practice  54 transmitted infections  374
assessment  118 Alimentary system Antidiuretic hormone  379

Acanthosis nigricans  21, 22f, 396, ageing processes in  86t Antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
397f, 411 see also Gastrointestinal system antibodies  301b, 302f

Accessory (XI) nerve  325 Allergens, inhalant  455b Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
Accompanying persons  11–12 Allergy testing  455, 455b (ANCA)-associated vasculitis 
Acidosis, fetal, detection of  60 Allodynia  161, 285, 313t (AAV)  149, 149b



466
Index

Antinuclear antibody tests  300 Asthma Barium enema  267–268, 268f
Antiphospholipid syndrome  281, 287 breathlessness  167 Barium follow-through 
Anuria  356 chest signs, in children  69t studies  266–267
Anus, examination of  259–260, cough  167 Barium swallow  266

267–268 exacerbation, during  180f Basal cell carcinoma  414–415, 415f
in children and adolescents  71 family history in  170 Beau’s lines  409–410

Anxiety  102 immunological tests for  186–187 Behaviour, psychiatric 
depersonalisation  110 occupational history in  170, 170b assessment  108–109
mood and  110 paradoxical pulse and  196–197 Bell’s palsy  20f
psychic symptoms of  103b sputum and  167–168, 179 Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo 
risk factors for  103 upper airway, symptoms in  169 (BPPV)  448
somatic symptoms of  103b Asymmetric field defects  422 Biceps reflex  335, 335t
speech and  109 Asymptomatic urinary Bimanual examination  50, 52f

Aorta abnormality  360 Biochemical investigation, appropriate 
coarctation of, signs of, in Ataxic dysarthria  326 use of  34

children  70t Ataxic gait disorder  345t Biochemical tests, for fetal 
palpation of  253–254, 254f Atherosclerotic or vascular wellbeing  60

Aortic coarctation, bony parkinsonism  345t Biochemistry tests, for fever  154
abnormalities  221 Athetoid movements  70 Biological tests, for fetal 

Aortic dilatation, chest X-ray  220, Athetosis  339t wellbeing  60–61
220f Atrial arrhythmias, diagnosis of  212, Biophysical tests, for fetal 

Aortic dissection  189, 191–192, 192b, 213f wellbeing  61–62
226f, 229–230, 229f, 233f Atrial ectopic beats  212 Biopsies, for rheumatic diseases  302, 

Aortic regurgitation  224b Atrial fibrillation  196, 212 302b, 302f
aortic root angiography  231 Atrial flutter  212 Biopsy
heart murmurs  201–202, 201f Atrial septal defect lung  186

Aortic root angiography  231, 233f chest X-ray  221f for respiratory system  184–186, 
Aortic sclerosis  90 echocardiography  223f 184f
Aortic stenosis  224b heart murmurs  201f, 202 of skin  417, 417f

echocardiography  224b, 224f signs of, in children  70t small intestine  267
heart murmurs  201–202, 201f Atrioventricular block Biopsychosocial model of pain  158f
rheumatic heart disease  201 diagnosis of  217–219 Biotin, deficiency  244t
syncope  189 first-degree  219 Birth history  64
systolic clicks  201 second-degree Birthmarks  80–81

Apex beat  199–200 Mobitz type I  219 Bishop score  57
Apgar score  80, 80b Mobitz type II  219 Bite, human or animal, in fever  148
Aphasia  349–350 third-degree (complete)  219 Bitemporal hemianopia  381
Apnoea  171 Atrioventricular conducting tissue Bladder, urinary. see Urinary bladder
Appetite, in psychiatric disease  218f Bladder stones  361

assessment  103, 107–108 Atrioventricular nodal re-entry Blepharitis  430
Applanation tonometry  431, tachycardia (AVNRT)  212–213 Blood, in sputum  179

431f–432f Atrophic glossitis  16, 16f Blood cultures, in fever  154
Apraxia  350–351 Auscultation Blood pressure

gait  345t. see also Frontal gait abdominal  256–257 in chest pain  123–124
disorder of chest  69, 69f, 176–178, 176b children, routine measurements 

Arcus senilis  430–431 of heart  200–203, 200b in  73–78
Argyll Robertson phenomenon  423 renal  358 diabetes mellitus and  398–399
Argyll Robertson pupils  317 Austin Flint murmur  202–203 endocrine disorders and  381, 387
Argyria  405 Autoinflammatory periodic syndromes, measurement of  24, 197–199
Arm, upper motor neuron disorders fever in  152–153 normal observation values, in 

affecting  346 Autonomic neuropathy, diabetes children  68t
Arms mellitus causing  395 Blood sampling, arterial  181

children and adolescents, Autonomy  37 Blood sugar, in seizures  134
examination of  67 Autopsy, consent for  40 Blood vessels, in eyes  428–429

‘GALS’ locomotor screen for  275, AVPU score, for diminished Blot haemorrhages  429b
275f, 275t consciousness  130–131, 130t B-mode ultrasound  434–435, 435f

rheumatoid nodule of  286f Axillae  21–22 Bodily systems
Arrhythmias. see Heart dysrhythmias history taking of  7–8, 8b
Arsenic poisoning, chronic  405 see also Cardiovascular system; 
Arterial blood gases  181b B Gastrointestinal system; 
Arterial blood sampling  181 Locomotor system; Nervous 
Arterial pulses  23 Back pain, causes of  279t system; Respiratory system

palpation of  196–197 Bacterial meningitis, fever and  148 Body temperature. see Temperature 
Arteriography Bacterial vaginosis, fever and  147 (body)

renal  368 Bacteriological tests, in gynaecology Body weight. see Weight (body)
see also Angiography and obstetrics  57 Bone

Arthralgia  146 Baker’s cyst  295–296 density  302–303, 304t
Asbestos exposure  170, 170b Balance examination of  282–284
Ascites assessment of  446–448, 451–452 fractures  283–284, 284b

cytology  265f ear anatomy  439 infection, fever and  149, 152
detection of  255–256 Ballism  339t lesions  302–303, 303b

Ascorbic acid, deficiency  244t Ballotting, in gastrointestinal metastases  303b
Asterixis  339t, 357 system  250 pain  281–282



467
Index

Bone marrow cultures, in fever  154 Caput succedaneum  81 Cellulitis, fever and  148
Bony abnormalities, cardiovascular Carbon dioxide, partial pressure Central defects, of pupil  423

disease and  221 (PaCO2)  181 Central scotoma  315–316
Bony skeleton, imaging of  182 Carcinoma, oral  458–459 Central spinal cord lesion  348–349
‘Boutonnière’ deformities  294–295 Cardiac enlargement  220, 220f Cephalhaematoma  81
Bowel disturbance, endocrine disorder Cardiac enzymes  237–238 Cerebellar (ataxic) dysarthria  326

and  383 Cardiac examination, cardiovascular Cerebellar dysfunction  334
Bowel sounds  257 system and  194–203 Cerebellar lesions  351
Brachioradialis reflex  335, 335t Cardiac impulse, chest palpation Cerebellar system  330–336
Bradycardia-tachycardia and  175 Cerebral cortex

syndrome  217, 217f Cardiac output motor pathways of  326–327, 327f
Bradykinesia, in Parkinson’s measurement  236–237 sensory loss  343–344

disease  338, 338b Cardiac silhouette  220–221, 220f sensory pathways of  338, 339f
Brain Cardiogenic shock, emergency Cerebrospinal fluid 

imaging, in psychiatric presentation  128t, 129 examination  353–354
assessment  119 Cardiotocography (CTG)  61,  Cerebrum, in consciousness  130

pain mechanism and  158–159 61f–62f Cervical spine  288–289, 289f
Brainstem auditory evoked Cardiovascular disease MRI scan of  307f

potentials  79–80 bony abnormalities and  221 Cervix
Brainstem lesions  351 risk factors for  190b cytology history  47
Breast Cardiovascular system  189–239 incompetence, vaginal examination 

development of  387–388 ageing processes in  86t for  57
examination of  26–27, 54, 388 bacteriology laboratory for  238–239 smears from  49–51, 49f

in gynaecological examination  48 biochemistry laboratory taking of  53
gynaecomastia  26f for  237–238 Chaperone  15, 48

Breath sounds  176–178 breathlessness (dyspnoea)  192–194 Characteristic field defects  422
children and adolescents, cardiac angiography  231–232 Charcot joints  284–285

examination of  69 cardiac catheterization  231–237 Charcot- Marie-Tooth disease  328
of older people  91 chest pain and  189–192 Cheilosis  16

Breathlessness (dyspnoea)  167, chest X-ray  219–221 Cheiroarthropathy, diabetic  397, 398f
192–194 children and adolescents, Chest

causes of  168b examination of  68 appearance of  173, 173b
emergency presentation  124–127, computed tomography for  228–230 auscultation of  176–178, 176b

124t–125t congenital heart disease lesion, children and adolescents, 
scale  168b categories of  70t examination of  68–69, 69t

Brief Pain Inventory  163 cyanosis  195–196 examination of  172–178
Brisk reflexes  334 diabetes mellitus and  398–399 expansion  175
Bristol Stool Chart  263 dizziness and  194 imaging for  181–187
Bronchial breathing  177 echocardiography for  221–225 plain X-rays. see Chest X-rays
Bronchiectasis  168, 410, 410f endocrine disorder and  387 movement of  173
Bronchiolitis, chest signs, in examination of  90, 194–203 newborn, examination of  81

children  69t for fever  150–151 observation of  171b
Bronchitis, sputum and  168,  haematology laboratory for  237 palpation of  173–175, 173b

178–179 history taking  149, 189–194, 190b percussion of  175–176, 176b
Bronchoscopy, for respiratory intracardiac pressure relative anatomy  172–173, 

disease  184, 184f–185f measurement  234–237 172f–173f
Brown-Séquard syndrome  347t, 348, intravascular ultrasound  233, 234f Chest pain  169, 189–192

348f magnetic resonance causes of  175b
Bulbar palsy (flaccid dysarthria)  326 imaging  230–231 emergency presentation  122–124, 
Bulge test  295–296 in older people  90 123b, 123t
Bundle branch block  206f palpitation  194 Chest wall
Bursae  282b, 287 pathology laboratory deformities  195
Butterfly wing rash  20f support  237–239 palpation of  199–200

pressure wire  232–233 Chest X-rays  174f–175f, 181–182, 
pulmonary angiography for  234 181b, 182f

C radionuclide imaging  227–228 cardiac patients and  219–221
renal failure and  359b chest pain  124

Cachexia  327–328 routine for examination  195b emergency presentation  139
Cacosmia  454 stress echocardiography  225–226 normal  219f
CAGE questionnaire, for psychiatric syncope  194 Cheyne-Stokes breathing  171–172

assessment  106, 106b Carotenaemia  413 Child neglect, signs of  72, 73b
Calcification Carotid sinus hypersensitivity  194 Children and adolescents  63–83

corneal  358–359, 389, 390f Carpal tunnel syndrome  282f, 397, consent  38
intracardiac  220–221 398f developmental milestones  65t

Calcium, endocrine disorders  Carpometacarpal joint  293, 294f developmental screening 
and  381 Case notes, differential diagnosis examination  78–80

Caloric testing, of balance  451, 451f and  32–33, 33b examination for  64–72, 66b
Campbell de Morgan  89 Cataracts  431 ‘GALS’ locomotor screen 
Candidal infection, sexually diabetic  398f for  276–277

transmitted infections due Catheterization, cardiac  231–237 general questions for  64b
to  370 see also Coronary angiography history taking  63–64, 63b

Candidiasis  393–394 Cauda equina, lesions of  348 routine measurements  72–78
Capacity  38, 38b, 96 Cavernous sinus, lesions of  320b social history for  64



468
Index

Chlamydia trachomatis Competency  38 Coronary angiography
discharge due to  49f Complex regional pain syndrome appropriate use of  35
mucopurulent cervicitis caused (CRPS) type I  285 cardiac catheterization and  231–

by  371f Computed tomography (CT) 232, 231b, 234f
Chloasma  405 appropriate use of  34–35 CT  228–230, 230f
Cholecalciferol, deficiency  244t for ear  451–452, 451f–452f Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) 
Cholecystitis, fever and  147 for eyes  434, 434f scars  195
Cholesteatoma  444, 445f for gastrointestinal system  270,  Coronary artery disease
Chorea  339t 270f causes of  191b
Choreiform movements  70 in gynaecology and obstetrics  58 emergencies  191
Choreoathetosis  339t for headache  352 myocardial perfusion 
Chorion biopsy (chorionic villus for kidney  367–368, 368f scintigraphy  228

sampling, CVS)  60 for locomotor system  306, 306f prevalence of  189
Chorioretinal atrophy  429b for neck masses  463, 463f risk factors for, emergency 
Chromium, deficiency  244t for nose and paranasal sinuses  456, presentation  123–124, 123b
Chromium-EDTA  365 456f Coronary heart disease, ECG diagnosis 
Chromosome abnormalities, for respiratory system  182 of  206–210

examination  66–67 Concussion, consciousness and  131 ‘Cortical foot’  346t
Chromosome analysis, for fetal Conduction  142b ‘Cortical hand’  346t

wellbeing  60–61 Conductive deafness  324, 441–442, Cortical sensory loss  343–344
Chronic liver disease, peripheral 446 Corticobulbar tract  327

stigmata of  245, 245b Condylomata acuminata  49–50 Corticospinal tract  327
Chronic meningitis, fever and  148 Confidentiality  39 Cotton wool spots, in retina  429b
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease past obstetric history and  47 Cough  167

(COPD)  167 in psychiatric assessment  101 causes of  168b
chest inspection  173 Confused older patient  95–96, 95b chronic, questions in history 
chest x-ray in  175f Confusion of  168b
lung function tests  179 acute, emergency presentation  135, sputum and  179

Chronic pain syndromes  278–279 135t Counselling, genetic  42
Chronic renal failure  359–360 in older people  95–96 Courvoisier’s law  253
Churg-Strauss syndrome  281 Confusional states  114 Crackles  177
Chvostek’s sign  390 Congenital heart disease  222 Cramps  381
Clasp-knife rigidity  328–329 Congenital nystagmus  322 Cranial nerves
Classical tremor, of Parkinson’s disease Congruity  315 children, examination in  70

(PD)  337 Consciousness diabetes mellitus and  395
Clinical methods  3 definition of  130 mydriasis  132t
Clock test  91, 91f diminished, emergency see also individual nerves
Clubbing presentation  130–132, C-reactive protein (CRP)  154, 300b

of fingers  17–18, 17f–18f, 196, 385, 130t–132t Creatine kinase  300b
410, 411b level of  115 Creatinine clearance  364–365

hands  171 loss of  309–310, 310t Crepitus
of toes  196 Consent  37–39 joint  286

Clue cells  373 for autopsy  40 tendon sheath  286
Coarctation of the aorta, bony for HIV  41 Crossed sensory deficit  347t

abnormalities  221 implications of  38 Croup  459
Cochlea  439, 440f–441f legal requirements for  38–39 chest signs, in children  69t
Cochlear and vestibular (VIII) in obstetric and gynaecological Cryoglobulins  301b

nerves  324 practice  45 Cusco’s speculum  52–53, 52f
Cognition  115, 116b obtaining  38 Cushing’s syndrome  23, 23f, 379,  
Cognitive function  349–351 for resuscitation  40 383

see also Capacity; Memory Constipation  242 Cutaneous vasculitic lesions  287
Cognitive impairment, imaging  endocrine disorders and  383 Cyanosis  23, 24f, 195–196, 403

of  352 in older people  91 newborns  80
Cogwheel rigidity  329 Constructional apraxia  350–351 Cystography, for urinary tract  367
Cold intolerance  380, 380b Consultation Cystometry, in gynaecology and 
Collateral history, in psychiatric for consent  38 obstetrics  59

history  100 for patient examination  15 Cystoscopy, in gynaecology and 
Colles’ fracture  284 psychiatric assessment  118 obstetrics  59
Collier’s sign  423 settings for  3 Cytogenetic disorder, endocrine 
Colonoscopy  268, 269f Contact allergy patch testing  417 disorder and  385
Colour blindness  421–422 Convection  142b
Colour vision  315, 421–422 Convergence, in eye movements  318
Colour-flow mapping  227 Convulsion. see Seizures D
Colposcopy  59 Coordination, development  70
Coma  130 Copper, deficiency  244t Dacryoadenitis  432

pupils in  317 Cordocentesis  61 Dacryocystogram  434, 434f
see also Consciousness, diminished Cornea, examination of  430–431 Daylight sign  297, 298f

Communication Corneal arcus  358–359, 397–398, Deafness, assessment of  324
in older people  91 398f Death
psychiatric assessment and  101 Corneal calcification  358–359, 389, after, confidentiality in  39

Communication aid, in older 390f at birth  54
people  87 Corneal light reflex  434 discussion of, issues in  40

Communication problems  91 Corneal reflex  322–323 Decision making, consent and  38



469
Index

Declaration of Geneva  41b, 42 Diet, diabetes mellitus and  394 Dysphonia  92, 326, 459–460, 460b, 
Declaration of Helsinki  42 Diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid 460f
Decubitus ulcers. see Pressure ulcers (99Tc-DTPA), for urinary Dyspnoea. see Breathlessness 
Deep dyspareunia  370 tract  367 (dyspnoea)
Deep vein thrombosis  26 Differential diagnoses. see Diagnosis, Dyspraxia  92
Delirium  95 differential Dystonia  339t
Delusional ideas, types of  113b Diffuse axonal injury (DAI), Dysuria  356
Dementia  95 consciousness and  131
Demyelinating polyneuropathies  345 Diffuse polyphonic wheeze, 
Deoxyhaemoglobin, skin colour breathlessness and  127 E

and  23 Digital examination, in gynaecological 
Depression  102, 102b examination  50 Ear  439–452

appearance and  107–108 Digital rectal examination  259–260, anatomy of  439, 440f–441f
appetite and  103 260f balance assessment  446–448, 
auditory hallucinations and  114 in older people  91 451–452
eye movements and  318 Dilated cardiomyopathy, in child  444f
memory impairment and  117 echocardiography  223f children and adolescents, 
mood and  110 Diminished consciousness, emergency examination of  71–72, 72f
neuropsychological testing for  119 presentation  130–132, examination of  443–446
risk factors for  103 130t–132t hearing. see Hearing
sleep pattern in  102 Diplopia  389–390 symptoms of disease  440–443
speech and  109 testing for  319–320 Eardrum (tympanic membrane)  439, 
suicidal thoughts and  110–111, Direct questions, in history taking  6, 440f, 444, 445f, 449–451

111b 6b Early morning wakening, in psychiatric 
Dermatological system, ageing Discoid lupus erythematosus  411, assessment  102

processes in  86t 411f Earwax  444
Dermatomes  339, 340f–341f Disease-centred interviews  6–7 Eating disorders, symptoms of  103, 
Dermatomyositis  407, 410–411, 410f Distraction test, hearing  79–80, 79f 107–108
Dermatoscopy, in skin  416–417 Distributive shock, emergency Ecchymosis  413
Developmental milestones  65t, 78 presentation  128t, 129–130 Echocardiography  221–225
Developmental screening Dix-Hallpike test  324, 448, 448f clinical applications of  222–225

examination  78–80 Dizziness  194, 381, 443 Doppler  226–227
Diabetes insipidus  379 DNA analysis, for fetal wellbeing  61 clinical applications of  227
Diabetes mellitus  392 DNA-binding test  300 principles of  227

cardiovascular risk factors and  394 Documentation, note-taking physics  222
complications of  394–395, 395b and  27–29 principles of  222
criteria for diagnosis of  393b Documentation, of not for stress  225–226
examination for  396–400, 396b resuscitation  40 Ectropion  432
hypoglycaemia and  395–396 Doppler blood flow, for fetal Edinger-Westphal nucleus  316
macrovascular disease and  394, wellbeing  62 Efferent pupillary defect  317

395f Doppler ultrasound, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome  299, 299f
microvascular disease and  394–395 echocardiography  226–227 Ejection murmurs  202
presenting symptoms of  392–394 clinical applications of  227 Elbow
skin problems and  393–394 principles of  227 examination of  292, 292f
symptoms of complications Double vision. see Diplopia testing muscle power of  331t–332t

of  394–395, 395b Downbeat nystagmus  322 Elderly people. see Older people
World Health Organization Down’s syndrome, tests in pregnancy Electrical activity, generation of  203

classification of  393b for  60 Electrical axis  204, 205f
Diabetic ketoacidosis  19 Drinking history. see Alcohol history ECG analysis  204
Diabetic nephropathy  358–359 Driver  39 Electrocardiogram (ECG)  203–206
Diabetic neuropathy  395 Drug eruptions  414, 415b analysis of  204–206
Diabetic retinopathy  394–395, 399b, Drug fever  153, 153t for chest pain  124

429f Drug history  9, 9b, 54 clinical applications of  206–219
Diagnosis cardiovascular disease  189, 190b electrophysiology  203–204

differential  15–29, 31 emergency presentation  122, 131, normal 12-lead  204, 206f
appropriate investigations, 133, 135–136, 138 Electroencephalography  352–353

selection of  34–35 of older people  88–89, 88b Electrolytes
case notes and  32–33, 33b Drug-induced nystagmus  321 balance, renal failure and  359b
to confirm or refute, key Drusen  429b cardiac patients  238

questions  32b Dry eyes  281, 281f Electromyography  353
full list of, ‘impression’ vs.  31b Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry Electronystagmography  451, 451f
initial management  31–35 (DEXA)  307–308 Electrophysiological tests, for 
management plan  32, 33b Dubreuilh’s elastoma  89 eyes  436–437
multiple causation  34 Duchenne muscular dystrophy  330f Emergencies, patient presenting 
patient and  33–34 Dupuytren’s contracture  17, 17f with  121–140
process of  32 Dysaesthesia  313t acute abdominal pain  138–139, 
unclear  34 Dysarthria  92, 326 138t

psychiatric  99 Dysdiadochokinesis  334 acute confusion  135, 135t
resuscitation versus  122 Dysgraphaesthesia  343 acute headache  136–137, 136t
steps in  3 Dyspareunia  47 breathlessness  124–127, 124t–125t

Diaphragm, imaging of  181–182 Dyspepsia  241–242 chest pain  122–124, 123b, 123t
Diarrhoea  242, 383 Dysphagia  241, 382, 460, 460b clinical assessment, importance 

chronic, test for  267 Dysphasia  92, 349–350 of  121



470
Index

Emergencies, patient presenting with Erythema nodosum  412, 413b Facial (VII) nerve  323, 439, 441f, 446
(Cont’d) Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Faecal amount, examination  263

diagnosis versus resuscitation  122 (ESR)  154, 300b Faecal colour, examination  263
diminished consciousness  130–132, Erythrocytes, in urinary sediment  364f Faecal fat, examination  263–264

130t–132t Essential tremor  337, 381 Faecal impaction  91, 91b
fever  122t Ethical considerations  37–42 Faecal incontinence  94
haematemesis  139–140, 139t autonomy  37 Faecal occult blood, examination  263
hypotension  127–130 confidentiality and  39 Faecal odour, examination  263
melaena  139–140, 139t consent  37–39 Faeces, examination of  263–264
pyrexial patient  122, 122t for autopsy  40 Failure to thrive  72–73
seizures  133–135, 133t–134t implications of, or refusal  38 Fallopian tubes, palpation of  50
septic patient  122, 122t legal requirements for  38–39 Fallot’s tetralogy. see Tetralogy of Fallot
shock  127–130, 128b, 128t obtaining  38 Falls  92b, 93–94
syncope  132–133, 132t medical ethics, principles of  42 ‘False localizing sign’  318
weakness  137–138, 137t setting the scene and  38 Familial Mediterranean fever 

Emergency department, headache Ethnic minority elders  96 (FMF)  152
in  310 Eustachian tube  455f Family history  9, 9b

Emotional abuse  73b Evaporation  142b cardiovascular disease  190b
Employment history. see Occupational Evoked-response audiometry  451 children and adolescents  64

history Examination. see Mental state diabetes mellitus  394
Empyema  186 examination (MSE); Physical endocrine disorders and  383–384
Encephalitis, fever and  148 examination respiratory disease  170
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS), for Exercise ECG  207–209, 208f Family members

respiratory system  184 Exercise stress testing  207–209 as accompanying persons  11
Endocarditis Exercise testing, ECG  212 autonomy, of patient  37

organisms implicated in  239t Exertional dyspnoea  193–194, 193t confidentiality and  39
see also Infective endocarditis Exertional weakness  312 consent for autopsy  40

Endocrine disorders  379–402 Exophthalmos (proptosis)  389–390, as interpreters  12, 101
ageing processes in  86t 390f of older people  87–88, 88b
endocrine history in  379–384 Expected date of delivery (EDD)  53 Fasciculations  328
examination for  384–390 External auditory canal  439, 444, 444f Fasting hypoglycaemia  381
eyes and  389–390 Extorsion, in eye movements  318 Fat, deposition of, endocrine disorder 
family history in  383–384 Extractable nuclear antigens and  384, 384f
general assessment for  384–385 (ENA)  300, 301b Fatigue
imaging for  391, 391f Eye contact, psychiatric diabetes mellitus and  392–393
investigations for  390–391 assessment  108 heart failure and  194
nervous system and  390 Eyelids Feet  25–26
palpitations and  381 assessment of  431–432 children and adolescents, 
presenting symptoms of  379–383 retraction  432, 432f examination of  67
visual disturbances from  381 Eye movements  317–322, 317f–318f, diabetes mellitus and  399–400, 
vomiting and  381–382 318t 400f

Endocrine stimulation tests  391 examination of  318–322, 319f examination of  297–299, 299f
Endocrine suppression tests  391 saccadic, testing for  321 peripheral vascular disease and  25, 
Endometrial sampling (biopsy), in terminology in  318 25f

gynaecology and obstetrics  58– Eyes  419–437 Female genital mutilation 
59, 59f children and adolescents, (FGM)  49–50

Endoscopic retrograde examination of  70–71 Femoral pulse  24
cholangiopancreatography diabetes mellitus and  397–398, Femoral stretch test  290
(ERCP)  270–271 399f Femoral vessels, palpation of  253–254, 

Endoscopic ultrasound, for endocrine disorders and  389–390, 254f
gastrointestinal system  270 390f Femur, Paget’s disease of  282

Endoscopy examination of  419–431 Ferguson’s speculum  52–53
nasal  454–455, 455f, 462f in children  433–434 Fetal heart rate (FHR)  56, 56f
small intestine  267 techniques  436–437 Fetal lie, determination of  55, 55f

Enthesopathy, of Achilles tendon  298 history taking  419 Fetal movements  53, 56
Entropion  432, 432f imaging of  434–436 biophysical tests for  61
Enuresis  357 newborn, examination of  81 Fetal presentation, determination 
Eosinophilia  153 of older people  92–93 of  55, 56f
Epicondylitis  292 renal failure and  359b Fetal wellbeing, tests of  60–62
Epidermis, anatomy of  404f respiratory disease and  172 biochemical  60
Epididymo-orchitis  370 uraemia in  358–359 biological  60–61
Epiglottis  456 biophysical  61–62
Epiglottitis  459 prenatal, non-invasive  61
Epilepsy  133 F α-Fetoprotein (AFP), as pregnancy 

imaging of  352 marker  60
Epistaxis (nose bleed)  453 Face Fever  122, 122t, 141–155
Erectile dysfunction, in sexually children and adolescents, in autoinflammatory periodic 

transmitted infections  370 examination of  66–67 syndromes  152–153
Erectile potency  382 facial nerve test  446 biochemistry tests for  154
Eruptive xanthomata  401, 401f newborn, examination of  81 causes of  143–149, 145b, 145f
Erysipelas  412, 412f pain in  454 infectious, investigations 
Erythema  403 Facial appearance, endocrine disorders for  153–155
Erythema ab igne  249, 405 and  384, 384f drug  153, 153t



471
Index

examination for  149–153 Full blood count, for fever  153 serum gastrin levels  265–266
general assessment in  149, 150t Fundus fluorescein angiography, for small intestine  266–267
systematic assessment in  149–153 eyes  435, 435f ultrasound scanning  269

full blood count for  153 Funduscopy  317 upper gastrointestinal 
histopathology for  155 Fungal infections  416–417, 417f endoscopy  265, 265f
history of  145–147 upper gastrointestinal tract, 

associated and constitutional radiology of  266, 266f
symptoms  146 G Gastrointestinal tract

behaviours and exposures  146 examination, for fever  151
past medical and surgical  146– Gait  16, 344 history  147

147, 146b abnormalities  274t Gate theory, of pain  158–159
personal  145–146 balance assessment  448 Gaze paresis
presenting complaint  145 in children  277 horizontal  320
systematic  147–149 disorders of  344 supranuclear  321

immunological tests for  155 examination of  299 vertical  320–321
inflammatory markers in  153–154 ‘GALS’ locomotor screen for  273 Gaze paretic nystagmus  321–322
laboratory tests for  153–155 of older people  92 Gegenhalten  329
main presenting complaint in  145 abnormalities  93b General anaesthesia, pelvic 
microbiology and virology tests psychiatric assessment  108 examination under  51

for  154–155 test for  344 General examination  15–29
patterns of  143, 144f Galactorrhoea  383 cardiovascular system statement 
radiology for  155 Gallbladder, palpation of  252, in  29b
thermoregulation and  141–143 252f–253f framework of pathological 
treatment for  143 ‘GALS’ locomotor screen  273–277, processes  29b

Fibreoptic nasal endoscope, 274b, 278t provisional management plan in  29b
flexible  461, 462f Garrulous patients  10, 11b General Medical Council (UK)

Fibromyalgia  285 Gastric secretory studies  265–266 confidentiality and  39
Finger-nose test  334 Gastrin, serum levels  265–266 doctors’ duties  14, 14b
Fingers Gastroenteritis, fever and  147 Genetic counselling  42

clubbing of  17–18, 17f–18f, 196, Gastrointestinal system  241–271 Genetics, ethical considerations 
385, 410, 411b abdominal fluid in  41–42

Dupuytren’s contracture in  17, 17f examination  262–264 Genital candidiasis, diabetes mellitus 
examination of  293, 294f faeces  263–264 and  393–394
gouty tophus of  285f peritoneal fluid  264, 265f Genital examination
tendon reflexes of  335t vomit  262–263 in female  372
testing muscle power of  331t–332t acute abdomen  260–262 in male  372, 372f
trigger phenomenon and  286 examination  262 Genital warts  371, 371f
see also Nails history of  260–262 Genitalia

First sound (S1), of heart  200 GI tract and abdomen children and adolescents, 
First-degree atrioventricular block  219 examination  245–260 examination of  71
Flaccid dysarthria  326 anus and rectum  259–260, 259f development of  387–389
Flame haemorrhages  429b, 429f auscultation  256–257 female  259, 389
Flatulence  242 female genitalia  259 male  258–259, 388–389
Flexible bronchoscopy, for respiratory general signs  245, 246f–248f newborn, examination of  81–82

system  184 groins  257–258, 257f–258f Genitourinary system, ageing processes 
Flexible sigmoidoscopy  268 inspection  245–249, 248f in  86t
Fluid thrill  256, 256f male genitalia  258–259 Genitourinary tract
Fluid volume status  358 palpation  249–255 examination, for fever  151
Fluids, intravenous  127–131 percussion  255–256, 256b, 256f history  147
Fluorescent in situ hybridization nutritional assessment  243–244, Genodermatoses  410–411

(FISH)  60–61, 61f 244t Geriatric giants  85, 87b, 93–95
Flushing  380–381, 403 in older people  91, 91b see also Older people
FMF. see Familial Mediterranean fever symptoms of GI disease  241–243, Gibbus, of lumbar spine  287–288, 

(FMF) 242b 288f
Focal central nervous system lesions, techniques for  264–271 Giddiness. see Dizziness

imaging of  352 colon, rectum and anus  267–268 Glandular fever  459
Focal weakness  312 computed tomography Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), for 
Fontanelles  66–67 scanning  270, 270f diminished consciousness  130–
Foot. see Feet endoscopic retrograde 131, 130t
Forced expiratory volume  179 cholangiopancreatography Global aphasia  349–350
Forced vital capacity  179 (ERCP)  270–271 Glossitis, atrophic  16, 16f
Forearm, examination of  292, 293f endoscopic ultrasound  270 Glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve  324–
Fourth sound (S4), of heart  200–201 gastric secretory studies  265–266 325, 324f
Fovea  429 Helicobacter pylori, test for  266 Glucose
Fractional flow reserve isotope scanning  270 cardiac patients  238

(FFR)  232–233 liver  268–269 diabetes mellitus and  392
Fractures  283–284, 284b magnetic resonance imaging  270 home, testing  394

radiological examination of  303f, oesophageal function studies  265 Glycosuria, renal  363
304–305, 305f–306f pancreatic function tests  271 Goitres  382, 389f

Frenzel’s glasses  446, 448f percutaneous transhepatic Goldman tonometry  431f
Friction rubs  203 cholangiography  271 Golfer’s elbow  292
Friends, as accompanying persons  11 positron emission tomography Gonococcal arthritis  280
Frontal gait disorder  345t scanning  270 Gonococcal urethritis  373, 373f



472
Index

Gout  285f Hairy leukoplakia  413, 414f Height measurements
acute  280b, 280f Halitosis  19 children  72–73, 74f–77f

Gowers’ sign  329–330, 330f Hallucinations  114b in older people  91
Gram-staining, for sexually Hands  17–19 Helicobacter pylori, test for, 

transmitted infections  373– appearance of, endocrine disorders gastrointestinal system and  266
374, 373b, 373f and  384f Helium-dilution technique  180–181

Granular casts, in urinary assessment of, for respiratory Hemianaesthesia  347t, 349
sediment  363–364, 364f system  171, 171b Hemianopia  314f, 390

Granuloma annulare  396, 397f diabetes mellitus and  396–397 Hemiparesis, spastic  346t
Grasp reflex  336 examination of  293–295 Hemiparetic gait disorder  345t
Graves’ disease  385, 389–390, 390f function, assessment of  295 Henoch-Schönlein disease, purpura 
Gravidity  54 upper motor neuron disorders in  357f
Great arteries, transposition of, signs affecting  346 Hepatitis, fever and  147

of, in children  70t xanthoma of  401f Hepatobiliary system, ageing processes 
Groins  257–258, 257f Hansen’s disease  407, 407f in  86t

children and adolescents, Hard exudates  429b Hepatomegaly, causes of, in 
examination of  71 Hard symptoms  12, 12b children  68t

lumps in  257–258, 258f Head Herpes simplex infections  413–414, 
Guaiac test  263 assessment of  172 414f, 461
Guarding  262 children and adolescents, Herpes zoster infections  413–414, 
Guillain-Barré syndrome, CSF examination of  66–67 414f

examination for  354 circumference  73, 74f–77f Hertel exophthalmometer  433, 433f
Gynaecological examination  48–50 newborn, examination of  81 High stepping gait disorder  345t

abdominal examination in  48–49, Head control, developmental Hippocratic Oath  42
49f screening  79, 79f Hips

equipment for  49f Head injury, fever and  148 examination of  295, 295b, 296f
speculum examination in  52–53, Head thrust test  324 newborn, examination of  82–83, 

52f–53f Headache  146, 310, 311t–312t 82f
Gynaecological history  45–48 in emergency department  310 testing muscle power of  332t–333t

cervical cytology history  47 imaging of  352 Hirsutism  383, 386
family history  48 Hearing Histopathology, for fever  155
medication or treatment history  48 assessment of  446 History of presenting complaint 
menstrual history  46, 46b–47b causes of deafness  441–442,  (HPC)  190b
pain history  45–46 442b History taking  4–12
past  48 developmental screening  65t, beginning of  4–5, 4b
past medical/surgical/anaesthetic 79–80, 79f cardiovascular system and  189–194, 

history  48 ear anatomy of  439 190b
past obstetric history  47, 48b examination of  443–446 children and adolescents  63–64, 
presenting complaint  45 investigations of  448–451 63b
sexual symptoms  47, 47b in older people  93 in chronological order  7
social history  48 impairment  87 detail clarification  8–10
urinary tract and uterovaginal risk factors for impairment  80b emergency presentation  4, 121–140

prolapse symptoms  46–47, 47b Heart acute abdominal pain  138–139, 
vaginal discharge  46 chest palpation and  175 138t

Gynaecomastia  26f, 382–383, 382b, imaging of  181 acute confusion  135, 135t
389f Heart block, atrioventricular  219b acute headache  136–137, 136t

Heart dysrhythmias diminished consciousness  130–
detection of  210–212 132, 130t–132t

H electrolytes  238 fever  122t
electrophysiological study  212 haematemesis  139–140, 139t

Habit spasms  70 renal function  238 hypotension  127–130
Haematemesis  243 Stokes-Adams attacks  194 melaena  139–140, 139t

emergency presentation  139–140, Heart failure  189, 224f seizures  133–135, 133t–134t
139t acute left ventricular  193b, 221f shock  127–130, 128b, 128t

Haematological disorders  86t breathlessness in  193–194 syncope  132–133, 132t
Haematological investigations, causes of  193t weakness  137–138, 137t

appropriate use of  34 cold extremities  196 examination and  12
Haematological system, renal failure congestive  193b eyes  419

and  359b fatigue  194 general principles of  3–14
Haematuria  355–356, 356b Heart murmurs  201–203, 201f locomotor system  277–282

recurrent visible  360 in children  69, 69b nervous system  309
Haemochromatosis  405 in sepsis  122 note keeping in  101
Haemoptysis  168–169 Heart rate, ECG analysis  204 note taking and  14

causes of  169b see also Pulses, rate and rhythm in older people  87–89, 87b
chest x-ray for  185f Heart rhythm, ECG analysis  204 patient examination and  15

Haemorrhage see also Pulses, rate and rhythm of patient in pain  159, 160b
classes of  129t Heart sounds  202 patient wants and  13, 13b
in skin  413 Heart surgery, in children  68 in psychiatric assessment  100

Hair  403–417 Heart valves, in older people  90 retaking  13–14
alopecia  408–409, 408b, 409f Heartburn  241 scene, setting  3–14
growth of  407–408, 408f Heat intolerance  380 schematic  7–8, 7b

excessive, endocrine disorders Heberden’s nodes  284–285, 285f themes, developing  5–7
and  383 Heel-shin test  334 in women  45



473
Index

Hoarseness  169, 459–460 Hysterosalpingography, in gynaecology Intelligence, in psychiatric 
Holmes Adie syndrome  317 and obstetrics  58, 58f assessment  117–118
Homan’s sign  26 Hysteroscopy, in gynaecology and Interest of patient, confidentiality 
Hoover’s sign  329 obstetrics  59, 59f in  39
Horizontal gaze paresis  320, 321f International Code of Medical 
Horner’s syndrome  172, 316, Ethics  41b, 42

422–423, 425f I Internuclear ophthalmoparesis  320, 
House-Brackmann facial nerve grading 321f

scale  446, 446t Imaging Interpreters  12, 101
Human chorionic gonadotrophin appropriate use of  34 Interstitial lung disease  221

(hCG)  57 chest  181–187 Interviewing technique, in history 
β Human chorionic gonadotrophin for endocrine  391, 392f taking, in psychiatric 

(hCG), as pregnancy eyes  434–436 assessment  101
marker  60 in gynaecology and obstetrics  58–60 Intorsion, in eye movements  318

Human immunodeficiency virus lung  181–187 Intra-abdominal infection, fever 
(HIV) infection  375–377 musculoskeletal  303b and  147

blood tests for  377 for pain investigation  161 Intracardiac shunts, haemodynamic 
clinical categories of  375b, 376f Immediate recall, in psychiatric evaluation of  236
mother-to-child transmission  assessment  117 Intracranial abscesses, fever and  148

of  377 Immobility  93 Intraocular pressure  429–431
signs of  377 Immune status, in fever  146 Intravenous fluids  127–131
testing, ethical considerations  Immune system  86t Inulin concentration  364–365

in  41 Immunological tests, for fever  155 Investigations
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Immunological tests, for respiratory appropriate  121

typing  301b system  186–187 selection of  34–35
Human papilloma virus (HPV)  49–50 Impetigo  412, 412f for patient in pain  161
Humphrey field test analyser  422, fever and  148 in rheumatic diseases  299–308, 300b

425f Implantable loop recording  212 Iodine, deficiency  244t
Hyaline casts, in urinary Impotence  382 Iris, examination of  431

sediment  363–364, 364f ‘Impression,’ differential diagnosis Iritis  431
Hydrocephalus  351–352 vs.  31b Iron deficiency  244t
Hymen, intact  51 Incontinence koilonychia in  16, 18, 19f
Hyperaesthesia  312, 313t faecal  94 Ishihara test, for colour vision  421–
Hyperalgesia  313t in pelvic examination  49–50, 51f 422, 424f
Hypercalcaemia  379, 381–382 urinary  357 Isometric contraction  329
Hyperhidrosis  380–381 gynaecological history taking Isosthenuria  362, 362f
Hyperkalaemia  238 and  47 Isotope perfusion scan  228f
Hyperkinetic movement disorders  338 in older people  94, 94b Isotope scanning, for gastrointestinal 
Hypermobility, of joints  299, 299f Incus  439, 440f system  270
Hyperparathyroidism  384, 389, 391f Independent mental capacity Itching  453–454
Hyperpathia  285, 313t advocates (IMCAs)  38, 96
Hypersensitivity  312 Indigestion (dyspepsia)  241–242
Hypertension Indirect questions, in history taking  6, J

electrolytes and  238 6b
renal  361 Infections Janeway lesions  196

Hypertensive retinopathy  428b, 428f in fever  146, 146b Jaundice  243, 404
Hyperthermia  142–143 fungal, diabetes mellitus and  396 in newborn  80
Hyperthyroidism  379, 380b sexually transmitted. see Sexually Jaw jerk  326, 334–335
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  189 transmitted infections testing  334–335
Hypertrophic pulmonary sputum  178–179 Jerk nystagmus  318

osteoarthropathy  410 statutorily notifiable  39 Joint
Hypervolaemia  358 Infective endocarditis  17–18, 18f, 196, crepitus  286
Hyphaema  431 238b examination of  284–286
Hypoaesthesia  313t, 342 blood cultures  238–239 localization of symptoms  282b
Hypoalgesia  161 echocardiography  225f Joint disease  279–280, 280b
Hypocalcaemia  381 fever and  149 extra-articular features of  286–287, 
Hypoglossal (XII) nerve  325–326, Inflammatory connective tissue 286b

326f diseases  281 Joint infections, fever and  148–149, 
Hypoglycaemia  381, 394–396 Inflammatory disorders, of CNS, CSF 152
Hypokalaemia  238 examination for  354 Joint pain  146
Hypokinetic dysarthria  326 Inflammatory joint disease  279, 280b Joint position sense  342–343
Hypoparathyroidism  381 Inflammatory markers, in Jugular venous pressure (JVP)  172, 
Hypopharynx  456 fever  153–154 198, 198b, 198f
Hypotension Inflammatory pain  157 in chest pain  123–124

emergency presentation  127–130 Information, in consent  37 Jugular venous pulse  198
postural  90, 194, 381 Informed patients  11 waveform of  199f

Hypothalamic-pituitary Inhibin A, as pregnancy marker  60
dysfunction  383 In-hospital ECG monitoring  210–211 K

Hypothyroidism  380, 380b, 385–386, Insight, in psychiatric assessment  118
386f Instability  93–94 Kaposi’s sarcoma, in HIV 

Hypovolaemia  358 Insulin infection  377f
Hypovolaemic shock, emergency for diabetes mellitus  394 Kay picture-matching test  433–434, 

presentation  128–129, 129t endocrine stimulation tests for  391 434f



474
Index

Keloid  405, 406f Limbs Lymphadenopathy, in joint 
Kerion  417f children and adolescents, disease  287
Kestenbaum’s sign  426–427 examination of  67 Lymphopaenia  153
Kidney newborn, examination of  81

laboratory assessment and imaging see also Arm; Leg
of  361–366 Linea nigra  249 M

left, palpation of  250, 250f Lipaemia retinalis  402f
oedema mechanisms of  196 Lipid, cardiac patients  238 Macrocephaly, causes of  73b
right, palpation of  251, 251f Lipid disorders  400–402 Macula

Kidney biopsy  35, 366 examination for  401 direct ophthalmoscopy of  429
Knee  295–296, 297f–298f history of  401 exudative diabetic  400f

locking of  279 investigation for  401–402 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
tendon reflexes of  335t Lipoatrophy  396, 397f of ear  451–452, 452f
testing muscle power of  332t–333t Lipodystrophy  376f of eyes  434

Koilonychia  18, 19f Lipohypertrophy  396, 397f of gastrointestinal system  270
Korotkoff sounds  197–198 Livedo reticularis  405 in gynaecology and obstetrics   
Kussmaul respiration  357 fever and  152, 153f 58
Kussmaul’s sign  198, 198f Liver of kidney  367–368
Kyphosis  173, 287–288 children and adolescents, of locomotor system  306, 307f

examination of  67f of nose and paranasal sinuses   
examination techniques 456

L for  268–269 of respiratory system  183
palpation of  251–252, 252f Malleus  439, 440f

Labour, vaginal examination in  57, percussion of  255 Malnutrition  16
57b Liver disorders, biochemical tests Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool 

Lacrimal gland, assessment of  432 in  268–269 (MUST)  244
Language Localized pigmentation  405 Management plan  32, 33b

in history taking  47 Locking, of joint  279 Manipulation, child, developmental 
of obstetrics  54 Locomotor system  273–308 milestones on  65t
in psychiatric history  101 examination of  282–299, 282b Marche à petits pas  345t

Lanugo hair  80–81 ‘GALS’ locomotor screen  273–277, Mastoid infection  443–444, 443f
Laparoscopic scars  48 278t McGill Questionnaire  162f, 163
Laparoscopy, in gynaecology and investigations in rheumatic diseases Mediastinum  175

obstetrics  60, 60f of  299–308 imaging of  181
Laryngoscopy, indirect  461, 461f specific locomotor history  277–282 Medical ethics, principles of  41b,  
Laryngotracheobronchitis  459 see also Movement disorders 42
Larynx  456, 457f Log MAR chart, for testing distance Medical negligence, ethical 
Lasègue’s test  161 vision  422f considerations in  40–41
Lead-pipe rigidity  329 Longer term memory, in psychiatric Medical records, inspection of, 
Left atrial pressure, increased  221 assessment confidentiality in  39
Left bundle branch block  219 recent  117 Medical Research Council scale,  
Leg  25–26 remote  117 for muscle strength  329,  

children and adolescents, Lordosis  287–288 330b
examination of  67 Lovibond’s angle  17, 17f Medical student status  15

‘GALS’ locomotor screen for  276, Low mood, in psychiatric Medication history  48
276f–277f, 276t assessment  102 see also Drug history

pitting oedema  25, 25f, 196 Lower body parkinsonism  345t Medulla
upper motor neuron disorders Lower limbs, coordination of  334 cranial nerve nuclei and tracts  324–

affecting  345–346 Lower motor neurons  327 325, 324f
Leg ulcers  89–90, 90f Lower respiratory tract infections, patterns of sensory loss in lesions 
Legal issues fever and  147 of  349

capacity of  38 Lumbar spine  289–290, 289f Melaena  243
for consent  38–39, 38b MRI scan of  307f emergency presentation  139–140, 
medical negligence  40–41 Lung 139t
own medical records, access in  39 anterior and posterior aspects Melanomas  414–415, 415f

Lens, examination of  431 of  172f Memory, in psychiatric 
Lethargy, diabetes mellitus biopsy  186 assessment  116–117

and  392–393 imaging for  181–187 Memory impairment  310
Leuconychia  18, 19f, 357 lateral aspect of  173f Men who have sex with men (MSM), 
Leukocytes, in urinary sediment  364f Lung auscultation, in sepsis  122 sexually transmitted infections 
Leukoplakia  91 Lung cancer  169–170 in  371–372
Lewy body  313–314 Lung fields  221 Menaquinones, deficiency  244t
Lhermitte’s symptom  312 imaging of  182 Meningiomas  34–35
Lichen planus  405, 405f, 410, 410f pulmonary angiography  234 subfrontal  313–314
Lid retraction  389–390, 390f Lung function tests  179–181 Meningitis  136
Lifestyle history  394 Lymph glands and CSF examination for  353–354

see also Alcohol history; Smoking lymphadenopathy  20–21, fever and  148
history 21f–22f Meningocoele  81

Ligament  282b Lymph nodes Menstruation, menstrual history 
Light touch, testing  342 cervical  458, 458f and  46, 46b–47b
Light-near dissociation  424b chest palpation and  173 Mental capacity  38, 38b
Limbic calcification. see Corneal children and adolescents, Mental Capacity Act (2005)  96

calcification examination of  67 Mental state evaluation  118



475
Index

Mental state examination (MSE)  99, Monogenic autoinflammatory Myopia  427
107–116 diseases  152b ‘Myotome’  327, 330

appearance in  107–108 Monoparesis, spastic  346t Myxomas
behaviour in  108–109 Mood, psychiatric echocardiography  225

eye contact  108 assessment  109–110 left atrial  195f
gait  108 Moro reflex  70b, 82f
general demeanour  108 Mother-to-child transmission  377
motor activity  108, 109b Motor activity, psychiatric N
rapport  108 assessment  108, 109b

cognition in  115, 116b Motor signs, patterns of  344–346, Nail-bed abnormalities  410
consciousness in, level of  115 346t Nail-fold infarction  17–18, 18f
mood in  109–110 Motor system  326–330, 327f Nail-fold vasculitis  287f
orientation in  115 examination of  327–330 Nails  403–417
perception in  114–115, 114b inspection of  327–328 clubbing in  410

abnormal  114–115, 115b muscle power and  329–330, diabetes mellitus and  396–397
person in  116 331t–333t matrix abnormalities in  409–410
place in  116 muscle tone and  328–329 and nail-bed abnormalities  410
speech in  109 see also Cerebellar system structure of  409f

rate of  109 Mouth in systemic disease  410
structure of  109, 110b burning sensation in  458–459, 459b Narrow pulse pressure, in shock  128t

thought in  110–113, 111b children and adolescents, Nasal blockage  453
abnormal beliefs  112–113, examination of  71–72 Nasolacrimal duct, assessment of  432, 

112b–113b newborn, examination of  81 433f
in elevated mood  111, 111b ulcers in  458–459 National Adult Reading Test 
obsessional thought  111–112 see also Tongue (NART)  117–118

time in  115–116 Movement disorders  336–338, 339t Nausea  381–382
Mesothelioma  170 Mucociliary clearance  455 Neck
Metabolic disorders  379–402 Mucous membranes, examination, for children and adolescents, 

muscle weakness and  380, 380b fever  149–150, 151t examination of  66–67
weight gain and  379 Multinodular goitre  386, 389f endocrine disorders and  386
weight loss and  379, 380b Multiple causation, differential examination of  461–463, 462f

Metabolic myopathy  380 diagnosis and  34 lump in  460–461, 461b. see also 
Microalbuminuria  363 Multiple sclerosis (MS) Goitres
Microaneurysms  429b CSF examination for  354 lymph glands and lymphadenopathy 
Microbiology tests, for fever  154–155 imaging of  352 and  20–21, 21f
Microcephaly, causes of  73b Multisystem diseases, examination movements of  289f
Microscopic haematuria  355 for  152–153 newborn, examination of  81
Micturition  261 Murmur. see Heart murmurs venous pulses  172

frequency of  356 Murphy’s sign  253 Neck pain  382
urgency of  357 Muscle, localization of symptoms Necrobiosis lipoidica  396, 397f

Midbrain, cranial nerves in  317, 317f in  282b Necrobiosis lipoidica 
Mid-systolic (‘ejection’) murmur  202 Muscle aches  146 diabeticorum  396, 397f, 412, 
Mini-Mental State Examination Muscle biopsy  302b 412f

(MMSE), for cognitive Muscle diseases, imaging of  352 Necrotising fasciitis, fever and  148
function  115, 116b Muscle power Needle biopsy, of liver  269

Mini-peak flow meter  180, 180f in children  70 Negative data  13
Miscarriages testing  329–330, 331t–333t Negative troponin test, for chest 

past obstetric history and  47 Muscle tone pain  124
presentation of obstetric cases assessment of  328–329 Neglect, in children  72, 73b

and  54 in children  70 Neglect phenomena  351
Mitral regurgitation  226b Muscle wasting  380 see also Sensory inattention

colour-flow Doppler  227f Musculoskeletal system Negligence  40–41
heart murmurs  201, 201f ageing processes in  86t Neoplastic leptomeningeal infiltration, 
rheumatic heart disease  201 examination, for fever  152 CSF examination for  354

Mitral stenosis  225b history  148–149 Nephrology, diagnostic process in  355
echocardiography  225f–226f renal failure and  359b Nephrotic syndrome  360
heart murmurs  201f see also Locomotor system Nerve conduction studies  353
heart sounds  200 Myalgia  146 Nervous system  309–354
left atrial pressure  221 Mydriasis  132t, 316 ageing processes in  86t

Mitral valve prolapse  201f Myelinated nerve fibres, in optic cerebellar system and  330–336
Mixed pain  157 disc  427–428, 428f cranial nerve examination 
M-mode echocardiogram, Myocardial disease  222 in  313–326

cardiovascular system and  222, regional contract  222 examination, for fever  151–152
223f Myocardial infarction history taking  147–148, 309

Mobitz type I second-degree anteroapical  231f investigations of  352–354
atrioventricular block  219 atrioventricular block  218f cerebrospinal fluid 

Mobitz type II second-degree ECG diagnosis  209, 209f examination  353–354
atrioventricular block  219 Myocardial ischaemia  190–191 electroencephalography  352–353

Molecular diagnostics, for Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy  228 imaging  352
fever  154–155 Myocarditis  232f nerve conduction studies and 

Mongolian blue spot  80–81 fever and  149 electromyography  353
Monoarthralgia, fever and  148–149 Myoclonus  339t localizing lesions in  351–352
Monochromatopsia  421–422 Myopathic gait disorder  345t mechanism of pain and  158



476
Index

Nervous system (Cont’d) Note keeping, in psychiatric Ophthalmoparesis, internuclear  320, 
motor system and  326–330, 327f assessment  101 321f
movement disorders and  336–338 Note taking  14 Ophthalmoscopy
neurological examination  313 see also Records direct  425–429
neurological history in  309–313, Nuclear antigens, extractable  300 examining fundi in  425–429, 

310b Nucleic acid amplification testing, for 426f
headache  310, 311t–312t sexually transmitted preparation for  425, 426f
Lhermitte’s symptom  312 infections  374 technique of  426b
loss of consciousness in  309–310, Nucleus ambiguus, in indirect  436, 436f

310t medulla  324–325 Opioids
memory impairment  310 Numb, definition of  312 for chronic pain  163
sensory symptoms  312, 313t Numerical rating scale, for pain  163 overdose, consciousness and  131
vertigo  310–312 Nutritional assessment  16, 91 Optic atrophy  426–427, 426b, 426f
weakness  312 Nystagmus  318 Optic chiasm lesion, visual field 

in older people  91–92, 91f, 92b balance and  446, 451, 451f defects in  314f
patterns of motor and sensory signs congenital  322 Optic disc

in  344–349 downbeat  322 cupping  427, 428f
posture and gait in  344 drug-induced  321 direct ophthalmoscopy of  425–428
renal failure and  359b gaze paretic  321–322 swelling  427, 427b, 427f
sensation and  338–344 pendular  322 Optic disc tomography  435–436
speech and  326 peripheral vestibular  321 Optic (II) nerves  314–317, 314f

Neuralgia  313t upbeat  322 examination of  314–317, 314f
Neurogenic shock, emergency lesion of, visual field defects in  314f

presentation  128t, 130 Optic tract lesion, visual field defects 
Neurological examination  69–70 O in  314f

cranial nerves, in children  70 Optical coherence tomography 
newborn  82 Obesity  379 (OCT)  435–436, 436f

Neuropathic pain  157 diabetes mellitus and  392 Oral candidiasis, in HIV 
assessment of  163 Obsessional thought  111–112 infection  377f
versus nociceptive pain  160t Obstetric examination  54–57 Oral cavity  456

Neuropathic ulcers  395f, 412 Obstetric history, past  47, 48b see also Mouth
Neuropathy, diabetic  395 relevant  54 Oral glucose tolerance test 
Neurosyphilis  423 Obstructive shock, emergency (OGTT)  400
Neutropenia  153 presentation  130 Orange peel skin  26
Neutrophilia  153 Obstructive sleep apnoea  172 Orbit, assessment of  433
New York Heart Association Occipital cortex lesion, visual field Organ donation, ethical considerations 

Classification (NYHA) defects in  314f in  40
classification, breathlessness in Occupational history  9, 48 Organ of Corti  439, 441f
heart failure  193–194, 193t respiratory disease  170 Orientation  115

Newborn, examination of  80–83, 80b Oculomotor (III) nerve  317–322, Oropharynx  456
Niacin deficiency  16, 244t 317f–318f, 318t, 320t Orthopnoea  194
Nicotinic acid, deficiency  244t Odours, diagnostic clues from  19 Oscillopsia  310–312
Nociceptive pain  157 see also Smell Osler’s nodes  17–18, 196

versus neuropathic pain  160t Odynophagia  241 Osmotic symptoms, of diabetes 
Nocturia  356, 392 Oedema mellitus  392
Nodal arrhythmias (supraventricular local  287, 287f Ossicles  439, 440f

tachycardias; SVTs)  212–214 pulmonary. see Pulmonary oedema Osteitis deformans. see Paget’s disease
Nodules, subcutaneous  286–287,  in renal patient  358 Osteoarthritis, nodal  284–285, 285f

286b subcutaneous  25, 196 Osteodystrophy, renal  358f
Non-calcific pericardial Oesophageal function studies  265 Osteomyelitis, fever and  149, 152

constriction  229f Oesophagus, dysphagia and  460 Otalgia  440, 441b
Non-convulsive status epilepticus Oestriol, unconjugated, as pregnancy Otitis, fever and  147

consciousness and  131 marker  60 Otitis media
in seizures  133 Older people  85–97 acute  444, 445f

Non-gonococcal urethritis  373, 373b abuse, inadequate care and  96–97 chronic  441, 442t
Non-inflammatory joint disease  279 capacity, assessment of  96 Otoacoustic emissions  79–80, 451
Non-organic weakness  329 confusion in  95–96 Otorrhoea  441, 442t
Non-organ-specific autoimmune definitions and  85 Otoscope  444

disorders  411 examination for  89–96 Ovaries, palpation of  50
Non-paralytic strabismus  321 falls  92b, 93–94 Overriding duty, confidentiality and  39
Non-ST elevation myocardial geriatric giants and  87b, 93–95 Oxygen, partial pressure (PaO2)  181

infarction  209, 209f history taking in  87–89, 87b Oxygenation defects, acute 
Non-verbal communication  5, 5b hoarseness  169 breathlessness due to  126–127
Nose and paranasal sinuses  452–456 hyperthyroidism in  379 Oxyhaemoglobin, skin colour and  23

allergy testing for  455 immobility in  93
anatomy of  452–453, 452f–453f incontinence in  94
children  71–72 instability of  93–94 P
examination of  454–455, 454f–455f normal ageing processes and  85, 86t
function of  452b presentation of disease in  85–87, Paget’s disease (osteitis 
mucociliary clearance for  455 86t, 87b deformans)  282, 283f
nasal patency for  455 pressure ulcers in  94–95, 94f–95f Pain
radiological examination for  456 Olfactory (I) nerves  313–326 acute  157–158, 163
symptoms of disease  453–454 Oliguria  356 bone  278b, 281–282



477
Index

chest  169, 175b, 189–192 Paraparesis  137–138, 345t Pes cavus  328, 328f
chronic  158, 163 spastic  328–329, 346t Phalen’s sign  397, 398f

common illnesses associated Paratonia (Gegenhalten)  329 Pharyngitis, viral  459
with  161t Parinaud’s syndrome  423 Pharynx  456–457, 457f

chronic, syndromes  278–279 Parkinsonian extrapyramidal Phonation  456–457, 458f
classification of  157–158 rigidity  329 Phylloquinone, deficiency  244t
definition of  157 Parkinsonian gait disorder  345t Physical abuse  73b
in ear  439 Parkinsonism, hypokinetic dysarthria Physical contact, in psychiatric 
facial  454 in  326 history  100–101
history taking  8–9, 8b Parkinson’s disease (PD)  338 Physical environment, in interview, 

gynaecological history  45–46 bradykinesia in  338b context of  100
measurement of  162–163 classical tremor of  337 Physical examination

with multidimensional (complex) clinical features of  338b children and adolescents  64–66
scales  163 posture in  344, 344f gynaecological examination and  48

with unidimensional Parotid gland  457–458, 458f Physique, in patient examination  16
scales  162–163 Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea   Pinard stethoscope  56, 56f

mechanisms of  158–159 194 Pinna  439, 443–444, 443f
in neck  382 Past medical history (PMH) Pinprick testing  342
ocular  419 cardiovascular disease and  190b Pitting oedema  25, 25f, 287f
oral  458–459, 459b fever  146–147, 146b Plagiocephalic skull  66, 66f
pathway for  159f general principles of  4, 7b, 9–10 Plain radiographs, for gastrointestinal 
patient in  159–163 in gynaecological history  48 tract  266

difficult cases of  161–162 psychiatric assessment  103 Plantar grasp  70b
examination of  159–161, 160b Patellar tap test  295–296 Plantar reflexes  336, 336f
history of  159, 160b Patency, nasal  455 Plasma creatinine 
investigation of  161 Patent ductus arteriosus  201f, 203 concentration  364–365

in proximal myopathy  380 Patient factors, interview context   Plasma urea  364–365
psychosocial aspects of  160b 100 Platelets, fever and  153
renal  355 Patient position, in imaging  181 Pleural aspiration, for respiratory 
severity assessment of  7 Patient-activated ECG recording   system  184–186
treatment strategies for  163 212 Pleural biopsy  186

nonpharmacological options Patient-centred interviews  6–7 Pleural effusion  170, 176, 178
in  163 Paton’s lines  427 chest x-ray for  185f

warning system  157, 158f Pattern recognition versus logical Light’s criteria for diagnosing   
Pallor  390, 403 analysis  13 186b
Palmar erythema  245, 245f Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR)  180 Pleural rub  177
Palmar grasp  70b Peau d’orange  26 Pleural thickening  184
Palpation Pediculosis  416 Pleuritic pain  169

abdominal  358 Pediculosis pubis  371 Pneumonia
of arterial pulses  23 Pellagra  16, 17f chest signs, in children  69t
for bone tenderness  283 Pelvic examination  48–50, 49f–51f chest x-ray showing  186f
of chest  173–175, 173b in special circumstances  50–53 emergency presentation  123
of chest wall  199–200 Pelvic inflammatory disease, fever sputum and  178–179
children and adolescents, and  147 Pneumothorax  169, 176, 178

examination of  67–68 Pendular nystagmus  322 Polyarteritis nodosa, fever and  152, 
in gastrointestinal system  249–255 Penis, in children  71 153f

correct method of  249, 249f Perception  114–115, 114b Polyarthralgia, fever and  148–149
deep, in obese, muscular or poor Percussion Polycystic ovary syndrome  383

relaxed patients  250, 250f chest  69, 175–176, 176b, 178 Polydipsia  379, 392
incorrect method of  249, 249f GI tract and abdomen  255–256, Polymyalgia rheumatica  280b

in gynaecological examination  48 256b, 256f Polyps
of joints  284–285 Percutaneous transhepatic nasal  454–455, 455f
of lymph glands  19 cholangiography  271 vocal cord  459–460, 460f
of neck  461 Perfusion scan  182, 183f Polyuria  356, 362, 379, 392
in pregnancy  55, 56f Pericardial disease  222–225 Popliteal pulse  24
of thyroid  386, 387f–388f Pericardial effusion  220, 225f Position, for patient examination  15
of vertebral column  287–288 see also Tamponade, cardiac Positron emission tomography (PET)

Palpitations  194, 381 Pericarditis for cardiovascular system  228
Pancoast tumour  172 acute  191 for gastrointestinal system  270
Pancreatic function tests  271 causes of  192b for respiratory system  184
Pantothenic acid, deficiency  244t constrictive  236, 236b, 237f for rheumatic diseases  308
Paparaceous skin  89, 89f–90f emergency presentation  123 Posterior tibial (PT) pulse  24
Papilloedema, in optic disc  427, 427f Perineum, newborn, examination Postural hypotension  90, 194, 381
PAPP A, as pregnancy marker  60 of  81–82 Postural unsteadiness, endocrine 
Paradoxical chest, in Periodic fever syndromes  152b disorders and  381

breathlessness  124–125 Peripheral nervous system, imaging Posture  16, 344
Paradoxical pulse  196–197, 197f of  352 Posture, children, developmental 
Paraesthesia  313t, 381 Peripheral vestibular nystagmus  321 milestones on  65t

diabetes mellitus and  395 Peritoneal fluid, aspiration of  264, Pout reflex  336
Paranasal sinuses. see Nose and 265f PR interval  204

paranasal sinuses Permission, confidentiality with  39 Prader orchidometer  388–389, 389f
Paraneoplastic skin conditions  403, Persistent ductus arteriosus, signs of, in Precordial auscultation, in chest 

405b children  70t pain  123–124



478
Index

Pregnancy presenting complaint  101–102 QRS morphology  204–205
abdominal examination in  54–56, psychosexual history  105–106, QT interval  205–206

55b, 56f 105b Quadrantanopia  315
drug/smoking/alcohol history structure of  101 Questions, indirect and direct, in 

and  54 Psychiatric patient, consciousness history taking  6, 6b
early markers of  60 and  131–132 Quinsy  459
history relating to  53–54 Psychosocial aspects, of pain  160b
late  60 Psychosomatic pain  157
medical history in  64, 64b Psychotropic medications  103, R
past obstetric history and  47, 48b 105–106
pelvic examination and  49–50 Ptosis  316, 432 Radial pulse  23–24
relevant past obstetric history and  54 Pubertal development  387–388 Radiation  142b
social history and  54 Pull test  338 Radiographs, plain, for urinary 
testing for  57 Pulmonary angiography  234 tract  366
vaginal examination in  56–57 Pulmonary artery wedge pressure  234 Radioisotope imaging

Presenting complaint, in women  45 Pulmonary embolism (PE)  192 lungs  182
history of  45 CT scan for  182 respiratory system  182–183

Presenting complaint (PC)  190b radioisotope imaging for  182, 228, Radioisotope studies  267
Pressure ulcers  94–95, 94f–95f 229f Radiological examination
Pressure wire  232–233 risk factors for  192b of abdomen  262, 262f
Primary cranial infections, risk factors for, emergency of ear  451–452

consciousness and  131 presentation  123–124, 123t of locomotor system  302–308, 303b
Primary delusions  112 Pulmonary flow, altered  221 of nose and paranasal sinuses  456, 
Primitive reflexes  70b, 82, 336 Pulmonary infarction, lung field 456f
Privacy, in psychiatric assessment  100 abnormalities and  221 of throat  463
Procalcitonin (PCT)  154 Pulmonary oedema  179, 192–193, 221 Radiology, for fever  155
Proprioception  342–343 Pulmonary regurgitation  201f, Radionuclide studies, of urinary 
Proptosis 202–203 tract  367, 368f

apparent  433 Pulmonary stenosis (PS) Range of movement, of joints  286
axial  433, 433f heart murmurs  201f, 202 Rapport, psychiatric assessment  108

Prosopagnosia  351 signs of, in children  70t Rash  146
Proteinuria  360, 363, 363t Pulse pressure  128, 198 Raynaud’s syndrome  18, 19f
Proximal motor neuropathy  395 Pulses  23–24 Reactive lymphocytosis  153
Pruritus, in systemic disease  412, 412b character of  196–197, 197f Rebound tenderness, abdominal  262
Pseudoathetosis  343, 343f jugular venous  198, 199b Records
Pseudohypoparathyroidism  385, 385f peripheral  194 confidentiality in  39
Psoriasis  405, 406f, 409–410, 409f rate and rhythm  196 note taking and  14
Psoriatic arthropathy  294f in children  68t Recreational drug history  131, 135t, 
Psychiatric assessment  99–119 symmetry  197 169–170

attention and concentration ‘Pulsus paradoxus’  196–197 Rectal biopsy  302b
in  116–118 Pupillary examination, for diminished Rectal bleeding  243

ending the interview  118 consciousness  132 Rectal examination  259–260, 259f, 
final reflection in  118 Pupillodilator muscle fibres  316 267–268
history taking in  100 lesion of  317 in children  71
interview, context of  100 Pupils  316–317, 422–425 Red eye  419, 421t
interviewing technique in  101 examination of  316 Reflex sympathetic dystrophy  285
investigations in  118–119 reactions  423 Reflexes  334–336
mental state examination for  99, shape  425, 425b abdominal  335–336

107–116 size  422–423 of children  70
non-English, interviewing of  101 Pure tone audiometry  448–449, grasp  336
psychiatric history  100–107 448f–449f jaw jerk and tendon reflexes 
psychiatry, definition of  99 Purpura  413, 413f in  334–335

Psychiatric history  100–107 in Henoch-Schönlein disease  357f of older people  92
confidentiality and note keeping senile  89, 89f plantar  336, 336f

in  101 P waves, ECG  204 pout  336
current social situation  106–107, atrioventricular block  218f primitive  336

106b morphology  204 tendon  334–335
alcohol, use of  106, 106b PR interval  204 testing  335, 335t
forensic history  106 Pyrexia Reflux  241
personality assessment  107, 107b infective endocarditis  196 Refraction test  436
recreational drugs  107 of unknown origin  155, 155b Refractive assessment  436

interviewing technique in  101 Pyrexial patient, emergency Registration, in psychiatric 
non-English, interviewing  101 presentation  122, 122t assessment  117
order of sections of  101–106, 102b Pyridoxine, deficiency  244t Relative afferent pupillary defect 

current medication  103 Pyuria, sterile  360 (RAPD)  316–317, 423
family history  103–104 Renal calculi  384
history of presenting complaint Renal disease

(HPC)  102–103 Q physical signs in  357–359
history of psychiatric symptoms of  355–357

disorder  103 QRS complexes  204 Renal function, cardiac patients  238
occupational history  105 atrioventricular block  218f Renal hypertension  361
past medical history  103 inscription of  203–204, 204f Renal osteodystrophy  304f, 358f
personal history  104–105 nodal arrhythmias  212 Renal stones  361, 384



479
Index

Renal syndromes  359–361, 359b, 359t S in male, symptoms of  370
Renal system, ageing processes in  86t presenting symptoms of  370–372
Renal tubular syndromes  361 Saccades  318 tests and further management 
Respiratory function tests  179 Saccadic eye movements  447 of  372–375
Respiratory rate testing  321 tropical infections of  374

assessment of  171–172 Sacroiliac joints  290–291, 306f Sheridan-Gardiner test  79
normal observation values, in Safety, in psychiatric assessment  100 Shock, emergency presentation  127–

children  68t Salivary glands  457–458, 458f, 460, 130, 128b, 128t
Respiratory rhythm, assessment 460b Short-term memory, in psychiatric 

of  171–172 Scabies  416 assessment  117
Respiratory system  167–187 Scarring, apical, chest x-ray Shoulders

ageing processes in  86t showing  185f examination of  291–292, 291f
children and adolescents, Scars testing muscle power of  331t–332t

examination of  68 CABG  195 Sims’ (duckbill) speculum  52–53, 53f
examination of  170–178, 171b, laparoscopic  48 Sinoatrial disease  216b, 217f

171f thoracotomy  173 bradycardia-tachycardia 
investigations of  178–187 Schamroth’s window test  410, 411f syndrome  217
in older people  90–91 Schiller’s test  59 diagnosis of  216–217
renal failure and  359b Schirmer’s test  281, 281f, 432, 432f sinoatrial block  217

Respiratory tract Schizophrenia sinus arrest  217
examination, for fever  150 diagnosis of  112b sinus bradycardia  217
history  147 symptoms of  112b Sinus arrest, prolonged  195f

Rest tremor  337 Schober’s test (modified)  290 Sinusitis, fever and  147
Resuscitation Scintigraphy  307, 308f Sjögren’s syndrome  281, 287

chest pain and  122–123 Scleroderma  22–23, 23f, 411 Skin  403–417
diagnosis versus  122 Scoliosis  173, 288, 288f, 328 changes of, endocrine disorders 
diminished consciousness Scotoma, central  315–316 and  383

and  130–131 Seborrhoeic keratoses  414–415, 415f colour of  403–405
ethical considerations in  40 Second sound (S2), of heart  200 conditions, history of  148
not for  40 splitting  200f diabetes mellitus and  393–394
seizures and  133 Seizures  310t drug eruptions  414
shock and  128 emergency presentation  133–135, endocrine disorders and  385–386, 

Reticular activating system, in 133t–134t 385f
consciousness  130 Selenium, deficiency  244t examination of  22–23, 403–410

Retina Senile purpura  89, 89f biopsy  417
common abnormalities of  429b Sensation  338–344 contact allergy patch testing  417
direct ophthalmoscopy of  429 cortical loss of  343–344 for fever  149–150, 151t

Retinal arteriolar emboli  428f cutaneous examination of  339–342 microscopic  416–417
Retinal photography, for eyes  435 primary cortex of  339f special techniques in  415–417, 
Retinol, deficiency  244t proprioception and  342–343 416b
Retrospective history taking  9–10 thermal  342 Tzanck preparation in  415
Review of systems, in older vibration sense and  342 Wood’s light in  417

patients  89 Sensitivity, in psychiatric functions of  403, 405b
Rheumatic fever  280 history  100–101 genodermatoses  410–411

fever and  152 Sensorineural deafness  441–442, 446 haemorrhage in  413
Jones’s criteria for  239b Sensory action potentials (SAPs)  353 history taking  403, 405b

Rheumatic heart disease  201, 202b Sensory inattention, testing  343–344 lesions and eruptions  405–407, 
Rheumatoid arthritis Sensory loss 406b–407b

episodic joint pain  280 patterns of  346–349, 347t configuration of  407, 408b
of hand  294–295, 304f trigeminal territory  322 distribution of  407
joint inflammation in  284, 285f Sensory symptoms  312, 313t morphology of  406–407
of knee  295–296 Sepsis  122 newborn, examination of  80–81

Rheumatoid factor  300 Septic patient, emergency non-organ-specific autoimmune 
Rhinitis  169 presentation  122, 122t disorders  411
Rhinorrhoea  453 Septicaemia  413 in older people  89–90, 89f–90f
Rhinosinusitis  169 Serology, for fever  154 peripheral nerve supply of  340f
Riboflavin, deficiency  244t Serum complement  300b pigmentation of  403–405,  
Ribs, anatomy of  172 Severe sepsis  122 411–413
Rice-water stools  263 Sex workers, sexually transmitted pressure ulcers and  94–95, 94f–95f
Rickets  282 infections in  372 segmental innervation of  340f–341f
Ridge thoracoscopy, for respiratory Sexual abuse  73b sensory symptoms of  312, 313t

system  186 Sexual history  369–370 in sexually transmitted diseases  413
Right bundle branch block  219 Sexual symptoms, gynaecological structure of  403, 404f
Rigid sigmoidoscopy  267 history and  47, 47b tumours in  414–415
Rigidity, abdominal  262 Sexually transmitted diseases, skin viral infection of  413–414
Ringworm, of scalp  416 in  413 Skull, in Paget’s disease  282, 283f
Rinne test  324, 446, 447f Sexually transmitted infections  368– Sleep apnoea  172
Romberg’s test  343, 447–448 372, 369b Sleep onset, in psychiatric 
Rooting reflexes  70b in female, symptoms of  370 assessment  102
Rotary movements, of eye  318 fever and  147 Slit lamp  429–431, 430f
Rotator cuff abnormality  291–292 genital examination for  372–377 Small intestine, examination 
Roth’s spots  196 history in  369–370, 369b techniques for  266–267
R waves, ECG  204 HIV, ethical considerations in  41 Small-bowel enema  267



480
Index

Smell Statin therapy  238 Systemic disease, nails in  410
disturbances of  454 Statutory disclosure  39 Systemic inflammatory response 
nasal anatomy  452–453 ‘Steppage’  345t syndrome (SIRS)  122

Smoking history  54, 169–170 Stepping reflex  70b Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Sneezing  453–454 Sternocleidomastoid muscle, accessory (SLE)  155, 281, 281f, 307f, 
Snellen distance vision  420–421, 422f nerve and  325 411

recording visual acuity by  421, 424f Sternomastoid tumour  67 fever with  152–153
technique  420, 424f Sternum  172 Systemic sclerosis  19, 21f

Social behaviour, developmental Stertor  459 Systolic clicks  201
milestones on  65t Stiff hand syndrome  397

Social history Stiffness, early morning  279
children and adolescents  64 Stillbirth  54 T
gynaecological history and  48 Stokes-Adams attacks  194
in older people  87–88 Stools Tactile agnosia  343
pregnancy and  54 children and adolescents, Tamponade, cardiac  236, 236b

Social networks  87–88, 88b examination of  78 Kussmaul’ s sign  198
Soft symptoms  12, 12b microbiology  264 Tanner staging  71t
Soft tissue Strabismus  318 Tardive dyskinesia  339t

damage, from fracture  284 non-paralytic  321 Tarsal conjunctiva  430, 430f
history of disease in  148 Straight leg raising (SLR)  290 Teamwork, emergency 
symptoms, of locomotor Strangury  356 presentation  128

system  281, 282b Stress, myocardial perfusion Tear film, examination of  430–431, 
Solar-induced skin changes  89 scintigraphy  228 431f
Somatoform disorder  100, 103 Stress echocardiography  225–226 Telangiectases  19, 20f
Sore throat  459 Stretch tests  343–344 Temperature (body)  16–17
Spastic dysarthria  326 Striae, violaceous  385–386, 385f children and adolescents  78
Spastic gait disorder  345t Striae atrophica  248 diurnal variation of  141, 142f
Spastic paraparesis  328–329, 346t Striae gravidarum  248 regulation of  141, 142b, 142f–143f
Spasticity  328–329 Stridor  124t–125t, 126, 169, 177, Tenderness
Speculum examination  52–53, 459, 459b chest palpation and  173, 175b

52f–53f Stroke, imaging of  352 joint  285, 285b
Speech  16 Subarachnoid haemorrhage, CSF Tendon, localization of symptoms 

developmental milestones on  65t examination for  354 in  282b
nervous system and  326 Subcutaneous emphysema  407 Tendon reflexes  334–335
psychiatric assessment  109 Subcutaneous nodules  286–287, 286b endocrine disorders and  390

Speech audiometry  449, 450f Subcutaneous oedema  406 of older people  92
Spider naevus  245, 245b, 245f Subfrontal tumour  313–314 testing  335, 335t
Spinal cord Sublingual gland  457–458, 458f Tendon sheath

central lesion of  348–349 Submandibular gland  457–458, 458f crepitus  286
infarction, anterior spinal artery Sudden visual disturbance  420t effusions  287

territory  349 Superficial dyspareunia  370 Tendon xanthomata  401, 401f
lesions of  348 Superior orbital fissure, lesions Tennis elbow  292
pain mechanism and  158–159 of  320b Terminologies, patient’s use of  47

Spine Superior vena cava obstruction Test Your Memory (TYM)  91
examination of  287–291 (SVCO)  172 Testes, in children  71
‘GALS’ locomotor screen for  273– Supranuclear gaze pareses  321 Tetralogy of Fallot

274, 274f Supraspinatus tendinitis  291, 291f ejection murmurs  202
Spirometer, lung function tests Surgical history, past, in gynaecological signs of, in children  70t

and  179, 180f history  48 Tetraparesis  345t
Spleen Swallowing, dysphagia and  382, 460 spastic  346t

children and adolescents, Swan-neck deformity  294–295, 294f Thenar wasting  282f
examination of  67–68 Sweating, increased  380–381 Thermal sensation  342

palpation of  250–251, 251f Swelling, chest palpation and  173 Thermoregulation, fever and  141–143
percussion  255 Symmetric bilateral (homonymous) Thiamine, deficiency  244t

Splenomegaly, causes of, in field defects  422 Third sound (S3), of heart  200–201
children  68t Symptoms Third-degree (complete) 

Splinter haemorrhages  17–18, 18f, analysis  12–13 atrioventricular block  219
287 severity of, assessment of  7, 7b Thirst  379, 392

Spondylosis  290 pain  7 Thomas’ test  295
Spontaneous abortion Syncope  194, 310t Thompson test  298–299

past obstetric history  47 emergency presentation  132–133, Thoracic outlet syndrome  221
presentation of obstetric cases  54 132t Thoracic spine  289–290

Spot diagnosis  34 Synovial biopsy  302b Thoracotomy, reasons for  68b
Spurling test  161 Synovial fluid examination  301–302, Thoracotomy scars  173
Sputum  167–168 302b Thought, psychiatric assessment  110–

examination of  178–179, 179b Synovitis, acute  285f 113, 111b
Squint  70–71, 318 Syphilis Throat  456–463
ST elevation myocardial infarction Argyll Robertson pupils in  317 anatomy of  456–458

(STEMI), ECG of  209–210, serological tests for  374 children and adolescents, 
209f sexually transmitted infections due examination of  71–72

ST segment morphology  206, 208f to  371 examination of  461
Stapes  439, 440f Syringomyelia  348–349 radiological examination for  463
Startle reflex  82 Syrinx  348–349 symptoms of disease  458–461



481
Index

Thrombi, echocardiography for  225, Trochlear (IV) nerve  317–322, laboratory assessment and imaging 
226f 317f–318f, 318t, 320t of  361–366

Thrombocytopaenia  153 True delusions  112 obstruction  361
Thrombocytosis  153 Tuberculosis stones  361

in inflammatory disease  300b sacroiliac joints and  306f uterovaginal prolapse, symptoms 
Thrush  458–459 spinal  287–288, 288f in  46–47, 47b, 51f
Thumb (carpometacarpal joint)  293, sputum and  179 Urine

294f tests for  187 children and adolescents, 
Thyroglossal cyst  461–462, 462f Tubular acidification, renal  366 examination of  78
Thyroid disease Tubular cast, in urine  363–364 colour of  362

eyes and  389–390 Tubular syndromes, renal  361 glomerular filtration rate of  364–
family history in  383 Tumours, in skin  414–415 365, 365f, 365t
general assessment for  384–385, Tuning fork tests  324, 342, 446, 447f glucose in  363

384f Turner syndrome  385 microbiological examination of  364
investigations for  390–391 T waves, ECG microscopy of  363t
nervous system and  390 QT interval  205–206 pH of  363
skin in, examination of  385–386 ST segment morphology  206 protein in  363, 363t

Thyroid eye disease  433 Two-dimensional echocardiogram, quantity of  362
Thyrotoxicosis  327–328, 381 cardiovascular system and  222 renal tubular function of  365–366
Tibia Tympanometry  449–451, 450f specific gravity and osmolality 

Paget’s disease of  282, 283f Tzanck preparation  415 of  362, 362f
stress fracture  308f in stone-forming patient  366

Tic  70, 339t testing  361–366
Tilt testing  212 U Urogenital system  355–377
Time course, of symptoms  12–13 Urography, for urinary tract
Tinea rubrum  416, 416f Ulceration, oral  458–459 antegrade  367
Tinel’s sign  397, 398f Ultrasound intravenous  366–367, 367f
Tinnitus  442–443 eyes  434–435, 435f retrograde  367
Tissue samples, consent for  40 gastrointestinal system  269 Urological disease
Tissue sampling, of throat  462–463 in gynaecology and obstetrics  58, physical signs in  357–359
Tocopherol, deficiency  244t 58f symptoms of  355–357
Toes intravascular  234f Urological syndromes  359–361, 359b, 

clubbing of  196 locomotor system  305–306 359t
testing muscle power of   for neck masses  463 Urology, diagnostic process in  355

332t–333t respiratory system  183–184 Uterovaginal prolapse
Tongue  461 for urinary tract  366 anatomical variations of  51f

atrophic glossitis in  16, 16f visualization of, fetal wellbeing assessment for  53
of newborn, examination of  81 and  61 pelvic examination and  49–50
of older people  92 Umbilicus  247 symptoms of, gynaecological history 

Tonic pupil  317 Undress, for examination  15 and  46–47, 47b
Tonsillitis  459 Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Uterus
Tonsils  456, 459 Scale  338 examination of  50
Torsades de pointes  215–216 Unilateral cerebral hemisphere fundal height with changing 
Total lung capacity (TLC)  180–181 lesions  351 gestation and  49f, 55f
Touch, light  342 Unilateral sensorineural deafness  324 size estimation in pregnancy of  55
Trachea Unterberger’s stepping test  448

anatomy of  172 Upbeat nystagmus  322
chest palpation and  175 Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy  265, V
position of, in imaging  181 265f
stenosis  183f Upper gastrointestinal tract, radiology Vaginal bleeding, pelvic examination 

Tracheal deviation, chest x-ray of  266, 266f for  50
showing  185f Upper limbs Vaginal candidiasis, fever and  147

Tracheal tug, in coordination of  334 Vaginal discharge, gynaecological 
breathlessness  124–125 testing muscle power of  331t–332t history and  46

Transient ischaemic attacks, sensory Upper motor neurons  326–327 Vaginal examination
symptoms in  312 disorders of in labour  57, 57b

Tremors  337–338, 337t, 381 affecting arm and hand  346 in pregnancy  56–57
Trendelenburg test  295 affecting leg  345–346 Vaginismus  51
Treponema pallidum  373f Upper respiratory tract infection, fever Vagus (X) nerve  325
Treponematoses  374 and  147 Valvular disease  222
Triceps, tendon reflexes of  335t Uraemia  357 Valvular obstruction  194
Trichomonas vaginalis, sexually Urethral discharge  357 Valvular stenosis

transmitted infections due Urgency, of micturition  357 haemodynamic evaluation 
to  370 Uric acid  300–301 of  235–236

Tricuspid regurgitation  201f Urinary bladder pressure signals  235f
Tricuspid stenosis  203 hesitancy in  357 Varicose veins  25–26, 26f

heart murmurs  201f palpation of  253, 253f Vascular bruits  257
Trigeminal territory sensory loss  322 percussion  255 Vascular dilatation, chest X-ray  220, 
Trigeminal (V) nerve  322–323 slow stream in  357 220f

motor component of  322–323 terminal dribbling in  357 Vascular infection, fever and  149
testing  323 Urinary tract Vascular lesions, consciousness 

sensory components of  322, 322f imaging of  366–368 and  131
Triglycerides, cardiac patients  238 infection  360 Vasoconstriction  403



482
Index

Vasovagal syncope  194 Vital capacity (VC)  179 gynaecological history of  45–48
‘malignant’ vasovagal syndrome  194 Vitamin B12, deficiency  244t cervical cytology history and  47

Venography, renal  368 Vitiligo  383, 385f, 403, 404f family history and  48
Venous hums  203 Vitreous, anterior, examination of  431 medication or treatment history 
Venous pulses Vocabulary  5–6, 5b in  48

assessment of  172 Vocal cords, carcinoma in  169 menstrual history in  46, 46b–47b
jugular, waveform of  199 Vocal folds  456, 458f, 459–460 pain history in  45–46

Venous thrombosis  26 Vocal fremitus  178 past  48
Ventilatory defects, acute Vocal resonance  177–178 past medical/surgical/anaesthetic 

breathlessness due to  126–127 Voice production  456–457, 458f history in  48
Ventricular aneurysms, left  200 Vomit, examination of  262–263 past obstetric history and  47, 48b
Ventricular angiography, left  231,  Vomiting  242 presenting complaint in  45

233f endocrine disorders and  381–382 sexual symptoms in  47, 47b
Ventricular arrhythmias von Recklinghausen’s disease  21, 22f social history in  48

diagnosis of  214–216 Vulva  49–50, 50f urinary tract and uterovaginal 
ventricular fibrillation  216 Vulvodynia  370 prolapse symptoms and  46–47, 
ventricular premature beats  214– 47b

215, 215f vaginal discharge in  46
ventricular tachycardia  215–216, W investigations in obstetrics and 

215f–216f gynaecology in  57–60
Ventricular dilatation, chest X-ray  220 Waldeyer’s ring  456 bacteriological and virus tests 
Ventricular hypertrophy, ECG analysis Walking. see Gait in  57

of  207f Warts, genital  49–50 imaging in  58–60
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) Water balance, renal failure and  359b pregnancy testing in  57

heart murmurs  201f, 202–203 Weakness  312 obstetric examination for  54–57
signs of, in children  70t bilateral palatal  325 general  54

Ventricular tachycardia  211f emergency presentation  137–138, presentation of obstetric cases  54
Ventriculography, radionuclide  227 137t tests of fetal wellbeing in  60–62
Vertebral column, general examination facial  323 biochemical  60

of  287–288 non-organic  329 biological  60–61
Vertical gaze pareses  320–321 of sternocleidomastoid muscle  325 biophysical  61–62
Vertigo  310–312, 324, 443, 443b, 448 Weber test  446 prenatal, non-invasive  61
Vesicular breath sounds  176 Websites, patient information and  11 Wood’s light  417
Vestibular neuritis  324 Wegener’s granulomatosis  281, 302f Work history. see Occupational  
Vestibular system  443 Weight (body) history
Vibration sense  342 children, routine measurements World Health Organization (WHO)
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery in  72–73, 74f–77f diabetes mellitus classification  392, 

(VATS), for respiratory diabetes mellitus and  392–393 393b
system  186 endocrine and metabolic diseases pain ladder from  163, 163f

Videolaryngostroboscopy  461, 462f and  380b Wrist
Videonystagmography  451, 451f gain or redistribution  379, 380b examination of  292–293, 293f–294f
Violaceous striae  385–386, 385f loss of  379, 392–393 testing muscle power of  331t–332t
Violent behaviour, in psychiatric measurement of, in older people  91

assessment  100 nutritional assessment  16, 16b
Viral hepatitis  269 psychiatric assessment  103 X
Viral infection, of skin  413–414 World Health Organization 
Viral meningitis, fever and  148 classification of  243–244, 244t Xanthelasmata  398f, 401
Virology tests, for fever  154–155 Weight loss  243 Xanthomata  412–413
Virus tests, in gynaecology and fever and  146 X-rays

obstetrics  57 Well-informed patients  11 computed tomography 
Vision Wheezes  177 measurement of  228–229

colour  315 emergency presentation  124t–125t, plain
developmental screening  65t, 79 126 for eyes  434
of older people  92–93, 93b Wheezing  169 for nose and paranasal 
sensory pathways of  314f Wide pulse pressure, in shock  128t sinuses  456, 456f

Visual acuity  79, 315, 419–421, 423f Wolff-Parkinson-White see also Chest X-rays
Visual agnosia  351 syndrome  213–214, 214f
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)  162 Women  45–62
Visual disturbance gynaecological examination Y

diabetes mellitus and  394 of  48–50 Yergason’s test  292
endocrine disorders and  381 abdominal examination  48–49, Young people, sexually transmitted 

Visual evoked potentials (VEP), of 49f infections in  372
eyes  436–437 breast examination  48

Visual fields  315–316 pelvic examination  48–50, 
defects, sites of lesions and  314f 49f–51f Z
examination of  315–316 speculum examination  52–53, 
testing for  422 52f–53f Zinc, deficiency  244t



This page intentionally left blank



This page intentionally left blank



This page intentionally left blank



This page intentionally left blank



This page intentionally left blank



This page intentionally left blank